Introduction
I
Beyond Good and Evil (BGE) is often considered to be one of Friedrich
Nietzsche’s greatest books. Though it is by no means clear what criteria
this assessment is based on, it is easy to understand how it comes about. It
seems to be an expression of the feeling that in this book Nietzsche gives
the most comprehensible and detached account of the major themes that
concerned him throughout his life. Nietzsche was suspicious of almost
everything addressed in this book – whether it be knowledge, truth, philosophy, or morality and religion. He regarded them as the source, or at
least the effect, of a misguided tendency in the development of human
nature: one that has led to disastrous cultural, social, and psychological
consequences. At the same time he lets us share his more constructive
views as well, mainly his views on how he wants us to perceive the world
and to change our lives in order to live up to this new perception. He speaks
of perspectivism, the will to power, of human nobility (Vornehmheit) and
of the conditions of a life liberated from the constraints of oppressive
tradition. In the middle of the book, he even adds a number of short
I thank Dartmouth College and especially Sally Sedgwick and Margaret Robinson, whose generous
hospitality gave me the opportunity to write this text. Special thanks to Karl Ameriks and Gary
Hatﬁeld for transforming my “English” into English and to Andreas Kemmerling for helpful
suggestions. Very special thanks to Dina Emundts for all sorts of comments. The version printed
here owes much to careful editing by Hilary Gaskin.


See, for example, the Introductions to BGE by Walter Kaufmann (Vintage: New York, ) and
Michael Tanner (Penguin: Harmondsworth, ; translation R. Hollingdale), and also Kaufmann, Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist (Meridian Books: New York, ), and
Tanner, Nietzsche (Oxford University Press: Oxford/New York, ). References for all quotations from BGE are to section numbers.

vii

Introduction
aphorisms, and he ends the book with a poem that hints at the artistic
background to his concern with decadence and the means for overcoming
it. Thus it would seem that the whole range of Nietzsche’s interests, his
prejudices and his preferences, his loathings and his hopes, and above all
his deep insights into our situation in the modern world, are united in an
exemplary way in BGE, and for this reason it is a great book.
Although there is something to be said for this view, it is not the only
view that is possible. There are quite a number of thinkers who would insist that it makes no sense at all to attribute greatness to any of Nietzsche’s
works. For these readers, all of Nietzsche’s writings are ﬂawed by serious
shortcomings that justify fundamental complaints, ranging from accusations that they are utterly irrational, or devoid of informative content, to
the conviction that they contain nothing but silly proclamations based on
unwarranted generalizations – or a mixture of both. According to proponents of this view, the best way to think of Nietzsche’s works is as the
disturbing documents of the creative process of someone who was on the
verge of madness. To call any of his works great would therefore amount
to a categorical mistake. Interestingly enough, this bleak evaluation is not
based on any disagreement with what the work’s admirers tell us we will
ﬁnd in it, or even any disagreement with the claim that it gives us the
quintessential Nietzsche.
It is a perplexing fact that it is by no means easy to decide which of these
two conﬂicting attitudes towards BGE should prevail, and in the end it
may be a rather personal matter. Nevertheless it is possible to identify some
conditions that will inﬂuence how we are likely to think about the merits
of this work. Three main factors should be taken into consideration. First,
much depends on how we interpret the aims pursued by Nietzsche’s work
in general and BGE in particular. Second, our evaluation will depend on
the amount of tolerance and sympathy that we are prepared to mobilize
towards Nietzsche the person, and also towards certain tendencies in
bourgeois culture in Germany in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The third and most important factor, however, is the way that we feel about
the very framework in which all our dealings with what we take to be reality
are embedded: if we are conﬁdent that our normal outlook on whatever
concerns us has been proven to be ultimately right, or at least on the right
track, then chances are high that we will end up thinking of Nietzsche
and BGE as a nuisance. If we are not convinced of the soundness of our
normal views, then we might have second thoughts about things, and in
viii

Introduction
that case a book like BGE might be considered illuminating and even
helpful.

II
Let us start with Nietzsche the person. In the history of art, science,
philosophy, and even literature one very often ﬁnds that in order to appreciate or to evaluate a work it is not much of an advantage to be familiar
with its author and his life: an intellectual or artistic product is better
judged on its own merits than on the basis of uncertain knowledge about
the idiosyncratic features and muddled purposes of its author. Moreover,
in some cases authors intentionally withdraw from their products in an
attempt to become invisible and to let the work speak for itself, and thus
leave us very few personal clues in their works. Rousseau could serve as
an example of the ﬁrst kind of case and Kant of the second; Kant goes so
far as to use the phrase de nobis ipsis silemus (“of our own person we will
say nothing”) as a motto for his main work. We therefore tend to believe
that a distinction can be drawn between the private views of the author
and the meaning of the work which the author produces.
Yet there are some works with respect to which such a consideration
does not so easily apply. These are works whose very meaning is tied
intrinsically to the person of their author, as is the case with diaries,
letters, personal notes, or autobiographies. Here our knowledge about the
author, or perhaps an understanding of the situation the author is in, are
necessary ingredients for an appreciation of the text. There are many
reasons to presume that Nietzsche thought of many of his texts as being
like diaries or personal notes that tell us something about himself and
about his perspective on the matters they address, rather than as products
that aim at objective, non-personal results. Hence, his biography may be
of interest in any attempt to assess his work.
Nietzsche’s life is surely not a success story; on the contrary, it is a
rather sad story of misery and failure. It is the story of a man who from
the beginning of his adult life, until the sudden and catastrophic end of
his productive period, was confronted with embarrassing and humiliating
experiences. This is true of his private life as well as of his relations with
the intellectual community of his time. He was plagued by ill health, a
psychosomatic wreck, suffering from all sorts of diseases ranging from
chronic nervous ailments and severe eye problems, which left him almost
ix

Introduction
blind, to extremely exhausting states of prolonged migraine. These conditions made life tolerable for him only in a few places in northern Italy
(in the winter) and the Swiss Engadine (in the summer), and it is in these
places that he spent most of his time in the s. His social relations
were always, to put it mildly, somewhat complicated. Those who apparently cared most about him, his mother and his sister, he found oppressive
and distasteful because they represented a type of personality he deeply
despised. Though he prided himself on being comfortable with women,
he does not seem to have been very successful in establishing emotionally
satisfying relationships with them, which is hardly surprising given his
views on women and on femininity (Weiblichkeit) in general. Things did
not go much better with his friends. The people whom he called “friends”
he quite often spoke of with great resentment: he charged all of them with
a lack of sensitivity toward him, he complained that none of them ever
bothered to study his works, and he accused them of failing to defend him
against public neglect. In short, he suffered deeply from a sense of solitude and isolation, from not being appropriately acknowledged because
of the supposed imperfections of the people around him.
To make things even worse, Nietzsche was not given the opportunity
to compensate for the shortcomings of his private life by enjoying institutional and public success in his roles as a university teacher and author.
Although he made a very promising start – he was appointed professor of
classics at Basle university at the early age of twenty-four – his academic
career disintegrated rapidly, in part because of his poor health and in part
because he became annoyed with his teaching duties. As for his fortunes
as an author, not much can be said that is positive. His ﬁrst book, the
now highly acclaimed treatise The Birth of Tragedy, did at least attract
the attention of classicists (though their reaction to it was for the most






See the annihilating remark aimed at both of them in Ecce Homo which culminates in Nietzsche’s
pronouncement: “I confess that the deepest objection to the Eternal Recurrence, my real idea from
the abyss, is always my mother and my sister” (KSA VI, § , translation from Tanner, Nietzsche,
p. ). KSA refers to Sämtliche Werke: Kritische Studienausgabe, ed. G. Colli and M. Montinari, 
vols. (de Gruyter: Berlin, ); this edition is based on the critical edition of Nietzsche’s works,
Werke: Kritische Gesamtausgabe, ed. G. Colli and M. Montinari,  vols. to date (de Gruyter:
Berlin, –).
Though Nietzsche addresses this topic in BGE as well (§  et seq.), the general tendency of his
outlook on women is documented most succinctly in the relevant passage of Ecce Homo (“Why I
write such good books,” § ).
A good example of this assessment of his friends is again to be found in Ecce Homo (“The case of
Wagner,” § ).

x

Introduction
part emphatically negative) and of members of the Wagnerian community
(including Wagner himself). But soon he had to realize that there was
only a marginal interest among the public in his way of dealing with issues,
whether they were philosophical topics such as truth and the metaphysical foundations of knowledge, topics concerning the history and value of
religion and morality, or topics such as the critical assessment of modern
culture and ideas about how to overcome what he considered to be the
fundamental problems of modernity. This lack of interest showed in the
dismal number of copies sold of his books.
The most discouraging experience for Nietzsche, however, may not
have been this failure to gain a wider recognition. If he could have believed
that his few readers represented some sort of elite, perhaps a group of
distinguished intellectuals, then their taking notice of his writings would
have been of importance to him and this might have counterbalanced his
lack of public success. Unfortunately he could not entertain even that
belief. From the very few reactions he became aware of – mostly reviews
of his books in more or less obscure journals – he had to conclude that
he was read by only a few readers – and the wrong ones. In his view,
his readership consisted of people either unable or unwilling (or both)
to understand him adequately. He blamed his readers for not being in
the least prepared to give credit to his intentions and for being attentive
only to those points which conveniently conﬁrmed them in their own
negative preconceptions. What he was missing on a fundamental level
was a readiness on the part of readers to explore things his way, a feeling
of intellectual kinship between author and audience, or, to put it another
way, he deeply craved recognition from an audience that he thought ﬁtting.
This is touchingly expressed in two short remarks from Ecce Homo. The
ﬁrst relates explicitly only to his Zarathustra, though it is quite likely
that Nietzsche thought it true of his other writings as well: “In order to



See the Introduction by Raymond Geuss to the edition of The Birth of Tragedy in this series
(Cambridge University Press, ).
Of the book Nietzsche valued most, Zarathustra, whose ﬁrst three parts were published separately
in  and , only about sixty to seventy copies each were sold within the ﬁrst three years
after their appearance (see letter to Franz Overbeck, summer : KSB VII, pp. –). The
fourth part of the Zarathustra was published in  in a private edition of only forty copies and
was not accessible to a wider public before . BGE did not fare much better:  copies were
sold within a year (see letter to Peter Gast,  June : KSB VIII, pp. –). Nietzsche comments
(in the same letter to Gast): “Instructive! Namely, they simply don’t want my literature.” It seems
that most of his other books had the same fate – they too were utterly neglected during the period
in his life when he would still have cared about their success.

xi

Introduction
understand anything at all from my Zarathustra, you might need to be
conditioned as I am – with one foot beyond life.” The second remark
delineates what he takes to be his ideal reader, and there is no doubt that
he meant what he says: “When I call up the image of a perfect reader,
what emerges is a monster of courage and curiosity, who is also supple,
clever, cautious, a born adventurer and discoverer.”
What emerges is a picture of a totally isolated, highly neurotic man who
had to try hard to avoid thinking of himself as a complete failure. His way
of dealing with this situation seems to have been simply not to accept the
idea that all these annoying circumstances might have been brought about
partly by particularities or deﬁciencies that could be traced back to his
own person, so he managed to combine a perfectly clear and even realistic
assessment of what was happening to him with an unshakeable conviction
that all this had nothing to do with him and revealed nothing about him.
It is this ability which, in my view, accounts for two dominant traits that
appear in his published works. The ﬁrst is that he never even came close
to considering the possibility that – given the general intellectual climate
of his time – his lack of success as an author might have something to do
with his pursuing the “wrong” topics in a “wrong” way. It never crossed
his mind that what he thought to be an interesting, novel, and valuable
insight might indeed have been exactly what it seemed to be to almost all
of his contemporaries – an overstated triviality, an extremely one-sided
exaggeration or an embarrassing piece of bad reasoning. He simply stuck
to the points he felt he had to make, deeply convinced of being on the right
track, and fending off all signs of criticism or neglect with the maxim “so
much the worse for the critic.”


Ecce Homo (“Why I am so wise,” end of § ).



Ibid. (“Why I write such good books,” end of § ). In the same text he mentions explicitly the
reactions to BGE as an example of how severely it was misunderstood or, to use his terminology,
how gravely this book was sinned against because its readers were not up to its challenge (“Why
I write such good books,” end of § ).



In Ecce Homo Nietzsche even presents an explanation as to why he believes this stance to be
perfectly reasonable: “Ultimately, nobody can get more out of things, including books, than he
already knows. For what one lacks access to from experience one will have no ear. Now let us
imagine an extreme case: that a book speaks of nothing but events that lie altogether beyond the
possibility of any frequent or even rare experience – that it is the ﬁrst language for a new series
of experiences. In that case, simply nothing will be heard, but there will be the acoustic illusion
that where nothing is heard, nothing is there . . . Whoever thought he had understood something
of me, had made up something out of me after his own image . . . and whoever had understood
nothing of me, denied that I need to be considered at all.” “Why I write such good books,” § ,

xii

Introduction
This attitude becomes increasingly visible in his writings after
Zarathustra and culminates in his late texts of , especially in Ecce
Homo. Here we ﬁnd brilliant and witty remarks which rightly became
notorious (though Nietzsche himself might not have found them very
amusing, because they can also be read as documents of despair). I quote
two of them: “We all know, several of us even know from experience,
what it is to have long ears. Well then, I will dare to claim that I have
the smallest ears. This is of no little interest to women – it seems they
think I understand them better? . . . I am the anti-ass par excellence and
this makes me a world-historical monster – I am, in Greek, but not only
in Greek, the Antichrist.” The other is: “I know my fate. One day, my
name will be associated with the memory of something tremendous – a
crisis the like of which the world has never seen, the most profound collision of conscience, of a decision brought about against everything that
has ever been believed, demanded, or held holy so far. I am not a man. I
am dynamite.”
The second trait which we ﬁnd in Nietzsche’s writings is closely connected to his inability to assess himself in the light of others’ reactions.
It consists in his total unconcern about the tenability of his views when
judged according to standards that he thinks are alien to his approach.
Starting from the conviction that there is no common ground between
him and his reader, that what he has to say is most likely incomprehensible to almost everybody else, he does not feel obliged to enter the social
game of competitive discourse. He refuses to try to convince people by
somehow connecting to their way of thinking; he does not refute possible arguments against the points he wants to make by giving reasons in
their favor. Instead, he makes abundantly clear his contempt for “normal” thinking and his impatience with the evaluations of others. It is this
stance which gives so many readers the impression of an overwhelming
polemical element in Nietzsche’s literary presentation of his views. He
reinforces it by insisting over and over again that what he has to tell us
are above all his truths. The claim to exclusivity is meant to imply both
that his main concern is not whether we ﬁnd these truths convincing, and
translation from W. Kaufmann, On the Genealogy of Morals and Ecce Homo (Vintage: New York,
), p. .


Ecce Homo, “Why I write such good books,” end of § , translation Kaufmann, p. .



Ibid., “Why I am a destiny,” beginning of § , translation Kaufmann, p. .

xiii

Introduction
that he does not pretend to have found the Truth, for he thinks this is a
metaphysical illusion anyway.
Thus we ﬁnd embedded in Nietzsche’s basic view of himself the recommendation not that we read his texts as aiming at “objectively valid”
judgments, at judgments that are (metaphysically) true irrespective of the
cultural and psychological context in which they are made (whatever that
may be), but that we think of them as narratives that he invites us to listen
to, without really obliging us to believe them if we are not the right kind
of person. This does not mean that the stories he has to tell us about,
say, truth, morality, the will to power, or culture are, in his view, on a
par with ﬁctions, pleasant or otherwise. On the contrary, he believed his
stories to be the ultimate stories, the stories that are destined to become
the standard versions of our assessment of these phenomena. This is not
because his narratives are objectively, or in a context-free sense, the most
ﬁtting; rather, they will succeed because eventually people will change to
a condition where they appreciate the fact that these narratives are best
suited to capture their sense of the right perspective on phenomena if
they are considered against the background of what for them is the real
meaning of life.
Before looking more closely at some aspects of BGE itself, let me summarize what I take to be the lessons for approaching Nietzsche’s writings
that can be learned from his personal situation and his way of dealing with
it. They take the form of three warnings: () do not expect these writings
to express impartial views on whatever subject they address – they express, in an emphatic sense, Nietzsche’s own views; () do not be annoyed
by his obsession with apodictic statements whose immense generality
very often contradicts both normal expectations of modesty and the most
obvious requirements of common sense – these stylistic eccentricities reﬂect his resolute disdain for what most people cherish, especially people
who he suspects are not willing to listen to him; () never forget that the
author does not want to get mixed up with “us,” his normal insensitive
“academic” readers. He does not want to be “one of us” – instead he
insists on what he calls “distance,” in order to uphold his view of himself
and to remind us of his uniqueness. A last quotation from Ecce Homo may
highlight these points: “Listen to me [the emphasis is on the ‘me’]. For I
am thus and thus. Do not, above all, confound me.”


Ibid., Preface, § .

xiv

Introduction

III
BGE is the ﬁrst book Nietzsche published after Thus Spoke Zarathustra.
He never gave up on the notion that all he really wanted to say is contained
in Zarathustra, and this led him to claim that the works he wrote after
Zarathustra are essentially nothing but elaborations and explications of
ideas already present in his opus magnum. This claim has been disputed
by quite a number of his commentators, ﬁrstly because many of the most
central ideas in Zarathustra cease to play an important role in his later
writings, and secondly because the literary form of the later writings
connects them much more closely to his books prior to Zarathustra than
to Zarathustra itself. However that may be, Nietzsche himself was of
the opinion that Zarathustra set the stage for everything he had to do
subsequently. He writes: “The task for the years that followed [i.e. the
years after Zarathustra] was mapped out as clearly as possible. Once the
yes-saying part of my task had been solved [by means of Zarathustra], it
was time for the no-saying, no-doing part.” This seems to imply that
he regarded his post-Zarathustra writings as consisting of predominantly
critical essays.
BGE is best known to a wider public for its proverbs. Indeed, some of
Nietzsche’s best-known maxims are assembled in this text, ranging from
perspicuous insights to highly controversial statements. Starting with the
Preface, where we ﬁnd his much used and misused saying, “Christianity
is Platonism for the ‘people,’” almost every one of the nine parts of
the book contains lines that have entered the repertoire of educated or
polemical discourse: “life as such is will to power” (§ ); “humans are
the still undetermined [nicht festgestellte] animals” (§ ); “When a woman
has scholarly inclinations, there is usually something wrong with her
sexuality” (§ ); “Morality in Europe these days is the morality of herd
animals” (§ ); and (slightly paraphrased here): “saintliness – the highest
spiritualization of the instinct of cleanliness” (§ ).
These proverbs are in a way the least of what BGE has to offer. Its
primary fascination lies on a deeper level: this book introduces us into a
world of remarkable conjectures, suspicions, and implications. Though
one might say this is true of most of Nietzsche’s other published works as
well, with the exception of Zarathustra, there is nevertheless a difference


See, e.g., M. Tanner, Introduction to BGE and Nietzsche, p. .



Ecce Homo, ‘Beyond Good and Evil ’, § , translation Kaufmann, p. .

xv

Introduction
in emphasis between BGE and the other writings. Whereas the other
texts pursue their subjects from many different angles, BGE (like The
Genealogy of Morals, which Nietzsche announced on the back of its title
page as “a sequel to my last book, Beyond Good and Evil, which it is
meant to supplement and clarify”) is highly focused on the psychological
aspects of its topics. In BGE Nietzsche confronts us primarily (though
not exclusively) with a dimension of his thought that he was particularly
proud of – his psychological stance. This integration of what he calls a
psychological point of view into his general practice of casting doubts on
received convictions by tracing their origins, of throwing into question
our most fundamental beliefs by pointing out their shakiness, and of
scrutinizing available alternatives in the light of a new vision of the value
of life – this I take to be the most distinctive feature of BGE.
Nietzsche himself gives the following account of what he is doing in
BGE: “This book () is in every essential a critique of modernity; modern sciences, modern arts, even modern politics are not excluded. Besides
this, it is an indication of an opposing type, which is as un-modern as possible, a noble, yes-saying type.” Though this characterization is accurate
and conﬁrms the view that Nietzsche considers his task to be mainly a
critical one, it is by no means complete. Interestingly enough, it does not
mention two topics which some readers take to be the subject of the most
disturbing reﬂections in the book: morality and religion. This is surprising because these are the topics which seem to emerge most strongly in
any consideration of its main message.
In order to appreciate the distinctive approach which Nietzsche favors
in BGE in his dealings with what he calls “modernity,” it might be worthwhile to say a few words about his more general outlook. The starting point
for almost everything Nietzsche is interested in throughout his entire intellectual career can be nicely summarized in the form of the question
“how are we to live?” or, more poignantly, “how are we to endure life?”
He considered this question to be of the utmost importance, because of
three interconnected convictions that he treated virtually as facts. His
ﬁrst conviction was that life is best conceived of as a chaotic dynamic
process without any stability or direction. The second is articulated in
the claim that we have no reason whatsoever to believe in any such thing
as the “sense” or the “value” of life, insofar as these terms imply the idea


Ibid.

xvi

Introduction
of an “objective” or “natural” purpose of life. The third is that human
life is value-oriented in its very essence – that is, without adherence to
some set of values or other, human life would be virtually impossible.
Whereas the ﬁrst conviction is supposed to state an ontological fact, the
second is meant to be an application of the ontological point to the normative aspects of human life in particular. The third conviction, though
somewhat at odds with the other two, is taken by Nietzsche to reveal a
psychological necessity. (How Nietzsche came to hold these convictions,
and whether they can be supported, there is not space to examine here,
although a closer look would no doubt lead back to his use of some of
Schopenhauer’s ideas and to his picture of what constituted the cultural
life of pre-Socratic ancient Greece.)
Against the background of these convictions, Nietzsche became interested in the question of the origin of values, a question that eventually
led him to a whole array of unorthodox and original answers. All his answers ultimately follow from a pattern of reasoning which in its most
basic structure is quite simple and straightforward: if there are no values
“out there,” in the sense in which we believe stars and other physical
objects to be “out there” and if, at the same time, we cannot do without
values, then there must be some value-creating capacity within ourselves
which is responsible for the values we cherish and which organizes our
lives. Though presumably we are all endowed with this capacity, there
are very few of us who manage to create values powerful enough to force
people into acceptance and to constitute cultural and social proﬁles. To
create such constitutive values seems to be, according to Nietzsche, the
prerogative of real philosophers (not philosophy professors), of unique
artists (if there are any), of even rarer founders of religions, and, above
all, of institutions that develop out of the teaching of creative individuals,
i.e., of science, philosophy, and theology. Thus, anyone interested in the
function and the origin of values should scrutinize the processes which
enabled these persons and institutions to create values.
At this point Nietzsche’s more detailed investigations tend to start
spreading out in a remarkable number of different directions. It is here,
too, that in one sense we should take BGE to have its point of departure. That the detailed analysis of all the phenomena connected with the


For, after all, there seems to be no reason to think that Nietzsche would not allow in principle
that each of us could be transformed into a “free spirit,” i.e., a person who has the capacity and
strength to create and stick to the “right” values.

xvii

Introduction
concept of value is a very tricky task methodologically is documented
not only in BGE but also in almost all of Nietzsche’s other writings.
Acknowledging the fact that the different features of the value-creating
processes are much too complex to be accessible by means of a single
explanatory scheme, Nietzsche tentatively pursues several different approaches. He merges psychological hypotheses with causal explanations,
and combines them with historical observations and linguistic considerations into a multi-perspectival technique that he fondly refers to as
his “genealogical method.” In BGE, where he is occupied mainly with
the psychological dimension of the process of value formation, he applies
this method primarily in an attempt to come to an understanding of those
aspects of the value problem that pertain to its normative elements, that
is, to the question of good and bad.
At the risk of oversimpliﬁcation one can say the bulk of this work
addresses three topics, each one of which can be expressed best in terms
of a question. The ﬁrst is this: why is it impossible for us to live without
values, why do we need values at all, or, more in line with Nietzsche’s
terminology, what is the value of values? The second is this: how does it
happen that the values we and the overwhelming majority of the members
of our culture subscribe to have either been bad from the beginning or
have degenerated into bad values? The third topic is this: what is the
right perspective on values; what should we expect values to be? Though
these three questions are in a certain sense perennial, Nietzsche relates
them directly to what he saw as the manifest historical situation of his
age and the prevailing conditions of the cultural tradition he lived in,
so much of what he has to say is deeply rooted in his response to late
nineteenth-century central European conceptions. This is something we
should never forget when we confront his texts. Nietzsche speaks to us
from the past, and this fact alone might account for some features of his
writing that we would now consider idiosyncratic – for example, his way
of talking about women and about national characteristics.

IV
At this point we face a problem that I take to be crucial for any adequate
assessment of Nietzsche’s project. It concerns the manner in which we
are to comprehend his approach to the topics under examination. Now
that we have identiﬁed a number of central questions that he discusses in
xviii

Introduction
BGE, it is tempting to proceed in the way normally used in dealing with
philosophical texts: stating the questions addressed, and then trying to
line up the arguments that the advocate of a position puts forward in favor
of the answers he comes up with. However, in the case of Nietzsche and
BGE it is by no means evident that such a procedure would capture what
Nietzsche is doing and what BGE is all about. There are few arguments
to be found in BGE, and those which can be extracted are seldom of
the most convincing kind. Following the normal procedure would also
encourage the illusion that Nietzsche designed BGE to be understood
simply in terms of arguments, whether good or bad, and I cannot ﬁnd
anything in BGE which would encourage such an illusion.
There is considerable evidence that we should try a different approach,
and the clue lies in Nietzsche’s numerous allusions to the practices of what
he calls the “new philosophers.” To be the type of philosopher Nietzsche
values is to follow hunches, to think at a “presto” pace (§ ), to embark on
experiments both intellectual and existential (§§ , ), to transform
and to create values (§§ , ), to put forward hypotheses that are risky:
in short, to be interested in what he calls “dangerous perhapses” (§ ). One
would not expect a person with this conception of philosophy to hold the
idea that what counts most in the endeavor to reach highly unorthodox
and sometimes even shocking insights is to be in possession of a “good
argument,” and that one could or should present one’s views in compliance
with this idea. Rather, one would expect such a person to pursue a very
different path in expressing his views, which would involve starting with a
bold claim or striking observation and then using it in a variety of different
ways. It might form the basis for an analysis of something in terms of that
claim or observation, or it might point to a symptom, presupposition, or
consequence of a very general or a very particular state of affairs. It even
might be related tentatively to topics which at ﬁrst sight have nothing




There are passages that make it very hard to believe in this illusion. See, e.g., remarks in § 
that the activity of reason-giving is a post hoc affair intended to justify “some fervent wish that
they have sifted through and made properly abstract,” or (in the same section) his making fun of
Spinoza’s mos geometricus as a masquerade. In my eyes, the most striking passage for discouraging
this illusion is to be found in § , where Nietzsche talks about what he calls philosophical states
or moods. Here he compares the “right” way of doing philosophy with the “normal” attitude and
writes concerning the latter: “You [‘normal’ philosophers] imagine every necessity is a need, a
painful having to follow and being compelled.” This “having to follow” and “being compelled” I
read as a reference to the procedure of establishing results via sound arguments.
Nietzsche uses the German word Versuch (attempt, experiment) in a broad way which makes that
term cover the connotations of Versuchung (temptation) and Versucher (tempter) as well. Cf. § .

xix

Introduction
to do with what the original claim or the ﬁrst observation was about. In
short, one could envision a philosopher under the spell of Nietzschean
“new philosophy” as someone whose methodology is deeply entangled in
and in thrall to what could be called “what if ” scenarios.
If this is how a “new philosopher” approaches problems, it seems beside
the point to treat Nietzsche’s proclaimed insights as based on arguments.
The concept of a “result” or a “solution” also becomes obsolete, since this
type of philosophy is obviously not oriented towards results and solutions
understood in the sense of statements which can be defended against
thorough critical resistance. Its aim consists instead in the uncovering
of surprising possibilities and the playful presentation of innovative perspectives that do not aspire to the status of rock-hard “truths” but are
meant to be offerings or propositions for a like-minded spirit.
Nietzsche obviously intended BGE to exemplify as clearly as possible all
the characteristics he attributes to the style, the method, and the intentions
of the “new philosophers” – and yet it is remarkable how often this fact
is not sufﬁciently acknowledged by his interpreters. This oversight is
remarkable not only because it seems to be in part responsible for awkward
attempts to integrate Nietzsche’s intellectual products into traditional
academic philosophy, but above all because it tends to miss what might be
called, for want of a better term, the “socio-hermeneutical” dimension of
what has become known as his doctrine of “perspectivism.” This doctrine






It should go without saying that this imagined scenario does not exclude “good arguments.” Rather,
the scenario is meant to show that if one deals with topics in the way outlined above, the guiding
intention is not to give or to ﬁnd “good arguments.” In Nietzsche’s terminology, this amounts
to the claim that a “good argument” is not an overriding methodological “value.” Invoking his
polemical inventory, one could say, in his spirit: to be obsessed by “the will to a good argument”
indicates bad taste.
Again, this characterization is not meant to suggest that what these “new philosophers” are
proclaiming is something they are not serious about or do not want us to take seriously. It is only
meant to emphasize that what they put forward is connected very intimately with their personal
point of view, and hence it is nothing that they can force on someone if there is no shared basis of
experience, of resentment (ressentiment), or suffering. See BGE § , where Nietzsche expresses
this point in an especially belligerent fashion.
These attempts do not necessarily result in uninformative or misleading accounts of aspects of
Nietzsche’s thought. On the contrary, many of them shed considerable light on the historical
background of his ideas and on the impact they could have on various discussions that happen
to take place within the framework of academic philosophy. They are, however, operating under
the unavoidable (and, perhaps, reasonable) restrictions of that framework. This puts them in the
position of having to abstract from the personal or “perspectival” features essential to Nietzsche’s
conceptions. That there is a price to be paid for this “academization” is obvious. It is revealed in
the difference between the excitement and fun that one can have in reading Nietzsche and the
boredom that one sometimes experiences when reading the literature on him.

xx

Introduction
in its most trivial reading amounts to the claim that our view of the
world and, consequently, the statements we take to be true, depend on
our situation, on our “perspective” on the world. Perspectivism thus
understood gives rise to the epistemological thesis that our knowledge
claims can never be true in an absolute or an objective sense, partly because
of the necessary spatial and temporal differences between the viewpoints
that each knower is bound to occupy when relating to an object, and
also because of the fact that we can never be certain that what appears
to us to be the case really is the case. Though it is true that in some
of his more conventional moods Nietzsche seems to have thought about
perspectivism along these lines, this reading gives no hint whatsoever of
why he should have been attracted to such a doctrine in his more inspired
moments. In this epistemological version the doctrine is neither original
nor interesting, but merely a version of skeptical or idealist claims that
used to be connected in popular writings with names like Berkeley and
Kant.
However, perspectivism takes on a much more promising dimension
if it is put into the broader context of the problem of justifying or at
least of making plausible an insistence on integrating a personal or subjective element into the expression of one’s views as a condition of their
making sense at all. By looking at this doctrine in this context, we can
appreciate it as stating conditions for understanding an expression that
purports to express something true, be it a text, a statement, or a confession. These conditions can be summarized in terms of two essential
convictions. () In order to understand a claim for truth embodied in
an expression, one has to have an understanding of the situation from
which that claim originates, and this presupposes being acquainted with
and involved in the personal attitudes, subjective experiences, and private evaluations which form the basis of the view expressed. () In order


Here I have to confess that this sketch of the epistemological interpretation of Nietzsche’s perspectivism may not be the most sympathetic one, and no doubt one can ﬁnd in the literature much
more sophisticated versions of this doctrine. However, this does not affect the main point I want
to make, which consists in the claim that the epistemological reading misses the central feature
of Nietzsche’s doctrine. There are some other misgivings concerning the reading that deserve
mention. The ﬁrst consists in the fact that Nietzsche – especially in BGE – is not in sympathy
with skepticism (see § ). Hence, why should he be interested in putting forward a doctrine
containing skeptical implications? A further reservation about the feasibility of the epistemological reading can be seen in the annoying consequence of having to credit Nietzsche with all sorts
of paradoxical and self-refuting claims such as “If perspectivism is true we cannot know it to be
true.” It should be noted that the “German form of skepticism” discussed approvingly in § 
has nothing to do with epistemological skepticism.

xxi

Introduction
to judge the correctness, or perhaps merely the plausibility, of such a
claim, one has to have an experiential or existential background similar
to that of the person who made the claim. It is because of this insistence on integrating subjective aspects into the process of understanding,
and because of the idea that judging the truth of a view presupposes
shared experiences, that I call this the “socio-hermeneutical” reading of
perspectivism.
If perspectivism is understood in these terms, then much of what is
going on in BGE and other texts by Nietzsche begins to look considerably
less arbitrary and idiosyncratic than has been claimed. For example, his
so-called “theory of truth” which he alludes to quite often in the ﬁrst two
books of BGE, seems less absurd than many commentators have taken
it to be. According to these critics Nietzsche’s perspectival conception
of truth endorses the following three statements: () there is no absolute
or objective truth; () what is taken to be truth is nothing but a ﬁction,
that is, a perspectival counterfeit or forgery (Fälschung) of what really
is the case; and () claims () and () are true. These three statements
together seem to imply the paradoxical claim that it is true that there
is no truth. So the critic argues. However, when read in the light of
the preceding remarks a much less extravagant interpretation of Nietzsche’s theory of truth suggests itself which is completely independent
of the issue of whether he really subscribes to these three statements. On
this interpretation, Nietzsche’s theory claims only () that there are no
context-free truths, where a context is to be deﬁned as the set of subjective
conditions that the utterer of a truth is governed by and that anyone who
wishes correctly to judge it is able to apprehend. It also claims () that
as an utterer or judger of a truth we are never in a position to be familiar
with a context in its entirety, that is, with all the conditions that deﬁne
it, and therefore we have to settle for an incomplete version of a context where the degree of incompleteness depends on differences between
our capacities to understand ourselves and others. From this it follows
() that, given our situation, every truth is deﬁned by this necessarily




That there are many epistemological and logical problems connected with holding such a paradoxical claim is not difﬁcult to point out. The most comprehensive discussion of these problems
with reference to Nietzsche that I know of is by M. Clark, Nietzsche on Truth and Philosophy
(Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, ).
Put a bit more bluntly, this claim amounts to the assertion that the concept “objective or absolute
truth” is an empty concept when understood in contraposition to “perspectival truth.”

xxii

Introduction
incomplete context. Thus every truth is a partial truth or a perspectival
ﬁction.
This “socio-hermeneutical” reading of perspectivism points to a more
commonsensical understanding of Nietzsche’s claims regarding truth. It
also suggests that some of the stylistic peculiarities of BGE and other texts
had a methodological function. BGE, like most of Nietzsche’s other texts,
has an aphoristic form. It looks like a collection of impromptu remarks,
each of which explores to a different degree of depth some aspect or other
of a particular observation, speciﬁc claim, or surprising phenomenon.
These remarks are numbered and loosely organized into topic-related
groups, each one of which carries a short descriptive phrase that functions
as its title. The impression is of an apparently arbitrary compilation of
notes which are actually presented in an artful, though idiosyncratic way.
Thus it has been maintained that we should approach BGE as we would
a work of literature rather than strictly in terms of philosophical text.
Though this impression is by no means misleading, it fails to be sensitive to
the intentions guiding the architectonic of this text. If a claim is fully comprehensible only when placed in its appropriate subjective and existential
context, then it is incumbent on an author to convey as much information
about this context as possible. One way of doing this consists in presenting
a whole array of thoughts which are designed primarily to inform us about
the various subjective stances characteristic of the individual making the
claim. The resulting collection may seem random because it can include
almost any conceivable digression under the pretense of being informative
about the subjective context. However, if the socio-hermeneutical interpretation is correct, the seeming randomness of Nietzsche’s aphorisms
can equally well be taken as a calculated and methodologically appropriate consequence of his perspectivism. In Nietzsche’s writings, as in life,
randomness can turn out to be an applied method in disguise.




It should be noticed that this reading is compatible with some of the most disturbing features of
Nietzsche’s talk about truth. It allows us to make sense of his insistence that there are degrees of
truth, which is exhibited most clearly in BGE in his reﬂection on how much “truth” one can take
(§ ). It also makes understandable the idea, very important to him, that truth is just a special
case of error. And it allows for the use of personal pronouns in connection with truth, a habit
Nietzsche is very fond of (cf. §§ , , ).
Though there is some question as to the applicability of terms such as “aphorism” or “aphoristic
form” to Nietzsche’s texts, he himself does not seem to have problems with such a characterization.
His own use of these terms in reference to his writings is documented in On the Genealogy of
Morals, Preface §  (KSA V, p. ) and §  (KSA V, p. ) and in Twilight of Idols, §§ , 
(KSA VI, p. ).

xxiii

Introduction

V
BGE deals with questions of how values arise psychologically and how we
should evaluate them. It discusses the origin and the meaning of philosophical values such as truth, the religious practice of establishing and
enforcing speciﬁc values such as faith, piety, and love of man, and the
motives and mechanisms involved in our cultivation of moral values such
as pity, fairness, and willingness to help each other. It also treats such
political and social values as democracy, equality, and progress, seeing
them as means of oppression and as indicators of decay and degeneration.
Most of this is done with the aim of ﬁnding out what brought about the
modern way of life, and what made modern culture such a doomed enterprise. The general tendency of the book is to claim that at the base of
the most deeply habitualized normative evaluations that modern people
take for granted, their most fundamental judgments about what has to
be considered “good” or “bad” in almost every sphere of human activity,
there ultimately lies a mixture of appalling character traits, ranging from
weakness and fear to wishful thinking and self-betrayal, and all these ﬁnd
their symptomatic expression in the modern condition.
Neither this critical message nor the material Nietzsche relies upon in
order to substantiate his assessment of modernity is peculiar to BGE. In
almost all his other writings, he discusses the shortcomings of philosophy, the dangers of religion, the built-in biases of science, and the damaging consequences of institutionalized moral and cultural values, and he
arrives at similar bleak conclusions. Thus, the message of BGE is just another version of Nietzsche’s general project. However, BGE is distinctive
not only in its emphasis on a psychological explanation of the rise to dominance of speciﬁc values, but also in two further respects. The ﬁrst relates to
the doctrine of the “will to power,” the second to his views on what might
be called “good” or “adequate” ways of confronting reality. Both topics belong to his relatively rare excursions into the world of “positive” thinking.


Obviously this overlap is intended by Nietzsche. It seems to be an architectonic device, for he
frequently quotes from and alludes to his other texts. The best example of this practice is to be found
right at the beginning (§ ) of BGE where he cites almost verbatim from the beginning of Human, All
Too Human. This quotation refers to his diagnosis of the most fundamental mistake of traditional
metaphysicians, i.e., their conception of the origin of oppositions. Cf. B. Glatzeder: ‘Perspektiven
der Wünschbarkeit’. Nietzsches Metaphysikkritik in Menschliches Allzumenschliches (Philo Verlag:
Berlin, ). In quoting this appraisal, which forms the basis of his far reaching criticism of
metaphysics and its notion of “objective” truth, he can treat it like a result whose justiﬁcation is
already given elsewhere.

xxiv

Introduction
The “will to power” makes its ﬁrst public appearance in Thus Spoke
Zarathustra. There it is introduced as one of the three major teachings
Zarathustra has to offer, the other two being his advocacy of the overman (Übermensch) and the conception of the Eternal Recurrence. It is
somewhat surprising that in Zarathustra Nietzsche has little to say about
what the “will to power” means. Fortunately he is a bit more explicit in
BGE, although here too the doctrine receives what is by no means an
exhaustive treatment. There is, however, some evidence that he wants
us to think of this doctrine as advancing or at least implying an ontological
hypothesis. Focusing on the hints he gives in BGE, the following picture
emerges: if we look at the phenomenon of organic life as an integral part
of reality, we ﬁnd that it consists not in a static condition but in a dynamic
and chaotic process of creation and decay, of overpowering and becoming
overpowered, of suppressing and being suppressed. This suggests that
what governs these processes is some sort of power struggle where every
single form of life has a tendency to overpower every other form. However,
to think of life in this way we have to assume that each living particle is
endowed with a certain amount of power that it has a will to realize. This
amount is supposed to deﬁne its “will to power” and thus is ultimately
decisive for its ability to develop itself and to survive, or, to use a famous
Nietzschean phrase, for its potential to become what it is. It is this line of
thought which led Nietzsche to the assertion that life is “will to power”
(§§ , ).
But this is merely one part of the story. In BGE Nietzsche tentatively
tries to pursue the conception of a “will to power” in a further direction.
He aims at a broader application of the conception by transforming it
from a principle of organic life into a much broader axiom pertaining to
the essence of nature in general. It is here that it acquires an ontological
meaning. The main motive for his attempt to conceive of the “will to
power” as a general ontological principle seems to be that there is no


It is because of the relatively superﬁcial and vague treatment of this doctrine in his published
writings that many interpretations of the meaning and function of “will to power” rely heavily on
Nietzsche’s Nachlass, the voluminous collection of his unpublished notes. However, though the
Nachlass indeed contains a considerable amount of material pertaining to that conception, it has
the disadvantage of giving support to widely divergent, if not contradictory, interpretations. This
is due to the fact that Nietzsche seems to have been experimenting with different meanings of this
concept without reaching a deﬁnite position. To appreciate the whole range of readings possible
see, for example, G. Abel, Nietzsche: Die Dynamik der Willen zur Macht und die ewige Wiederkehr
(de Gruyter: Berlin, , nd edn), and V. Gerhardt, Vom Willen zur Macht: Anthropologie und
Metaphysik der Macht am exemplarischen Fall Friedrich Nietzsches (de Gruyter: Berlin, ).

xxv

Introduction
reason to restrict the explanatory force of that concept to organic life.
Why not think of inorganic matter, of the material world, in terms of
“will to power” as well? Matter would then have to be conceived as “will
to power” paralyzed, as “will to power” in a state of potentiality. According
to Nietzsche this view would allow for a uniﬁed account of the world in its
totality: “The world seen from inside, the world determined and described
with respect to its ‘intelligible character’ – would be just this will to
power and nothing else” (§ ). This view would also have the advantage
of overcoming the basic bias of traditional metaphysics that there is a
difference in kind between being and becoming, because it implies that
being static and stable is in the end nothing but a degenerative form of
becoming, or nothing but an unactualized power process. It goes without
saying that Nietzsche is very much in favor of this claim.
Even if it is conceded that Nietzsche never really elaborated his concept
of the “will to power” sufﬁciently, it does not appear to be one of his more
attractive ideas. The reason for this is that it purports to give us insight into
the essence of nature, what nature is “in itself,” but this does not square
well with his emphatic criticism, put forward in BGE and elsewhere,
of the very notion of an “in itself.” According to Nietzsche there is no
“in itself,” no essence, no ﬁxed nature of things, and all beliefs to the
contrary are founded on deep and far-reaching metaphysical illusions.
It seems therefore that one cannot avoid the unsettling conclusion that
the doctrine of a “will to power” shares all the vices which Nietzsche
attributes to metaphysical thinking in general.
There are no such untoward consequences of the second piece of “positive” thinking in BGE, but this is because it scarcely qualiﬁes as thinking at
all, consisting instead of fantasies about what the ideal conditions would be
for a person to be able to participate in productive thinking. Here productive thinking seems to mean the capacity to live up to the task of enduring
an unbiased assessment of reality. Nietzsche summarizes these fantasies
in the picture he gives of the “new philosophers” and in remarks on what
it means to be noble. Nobility, for him, has to do with putting oneself at a
distance from people and things. It is rooted in and is the product of the
“pathos of distance,” to use his inﬂuential formula (§ ). This pathos
has to be conceived as the socially inherited ability () to have a sense
for differences in rank between persons, () to accept these differences
as pointing to differences in distinction (deﬁned as a positive quality of
worthiness), and () to strive for higher distinction. A person possessing
xxvi

Introduction
this ability is able to strive for unique states of awareness: “Without the
pathos of distance . . . that other more mysterious pathos could not have
grown at all, that demand for new expansions of distance within the soul
itself, the development of states that are increasingly high, rare, distant,
tautly drawn and comprehensive, and, in short, the enhancement of the
type ‘man,’ the constant ‘self-overcoming of man’ (to use a moral formula
in a supra-moral sense)” (§ ). The ability to achieve such states seems
to function as a condition of gaining important insights and having
the psychological resources needed to live with them, and it indicates a certain stance towards reality superior to “normal” or “common” attitudes
(cf. § ).
With this plea for nobility Nietzsche states again his conviction that
what ultimately counts in our epistemic dealings with reality is not knowledge per se, that is, knowledge detached from the knower. What deserves
the title of knowledge has to be intimately connected with the special
and unique situation a knowing subject is in. This is so not only because
according to Nietzsche knowledge is not an “objective” or impersonal
affair, something one can have like a detached thing that one possesses,
but above all because the knowing subject has to live his knowledge. The
extent to which a subject can do this depends on personal constitution,
character traits, and intellectual robustness. Knowledge thus becomes associated with the question of how much truth one can endure (cf. § ).
It is in this context that the concept of nobility reveals itself to be part of
a “positive” teaching: nobility that is the product of the social pathos of
distance increases the potential of a subject for enduring “uncommon”
knowledge because it promotes more comprehensive states, and these in
turn indicate a growing strength in the subject’s character that enables it
to cope with more of “the truth.” This at least seems to be Nietzsche’s
message.
What is it that makes reading BGE and other writings of Nietzsche such
an attractive and stimulating experience? The main reason, I believe, has
little to do with the plausibility, let alone the correctness, of his views. On
the contrary, we like many of his ideas precisely because of their pointed
one-sidedness, their extravagance, and their eccentricity. Nor, I suspect,
are we now especially preoccupied with the topics which he obviously
took to be decisive for an evaluation of our way of living under modern
conditions. Many of his themes we now consider rather obsolete, and
to some of them we no longer have any immediate access because they
xxvii

Introduction
are deeply rooted in their nineteenth-century contexts. The fascination
his works still have must therefore originate from somewhere else. If one
wants to account for the appeal of his writings, it is perhaps advisable
not to look too closely at his actual teachings, but to think of his texts as
a kind of mental tonic designed to encourage his readers to continue to
confront their doubts and suspicions about the well-foundedness of many
of their most fundamental ideas about themselves and their world. This
would suggest that Nietzsche’s works may still be captivating because they
confront a concern that is not restricted to modern times. They address
our uncomfortable feeling that our awareness of ourselves and of the
world depends on conceptions that we ultimately do not understand. We
conceive of ourselves as subjects trying to live a decent life, guided in our
doings by aims that ﬁt the normal expectations of our social and cultural
environment; we believe certain things to be true beyond any doubt, and
we hold others and ourselves to many moral obligations. Although all this
is constitutive of a normal way of life, we have only a vague idea of why
we have to deal with things in this way; we do not really know what in
the end justiﬁes these practices. In questioning not the normality but the
objectivity or truth of such a normal world view, Nietzsche’s writings can
have the effect of making us feel less worried about our inability to account
for some of our central convictions in an “absolute” way. It is up to each
of us to decide whether to be grateful for this reminder or to loathe it.
Rolf-Peter Horstmann

xxviii

Chronology















Born in Röcken, a small village in the Prussian province of
Saxony, on  October.
Birth of his sister Elisabeth.
Birth of his brother Joseph.
His father, a Lutheran minister, dies at age thirty-six of
“softening of the brain.”
Brother dies; family moves to Naumburg to live with father’s
mother and her sisters.
Begins studies at Pforta, Germany’s most famous school for
education in the classics.
Graduates from Pforta with a thesis in Latin on the Greek poet
Theogonis; enters the University of Bonn as a theology student.
Transfers from Bonn, following the classical philologist
Friedrich Ritschl to Leipzig where he registers as a philology
student; reads Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and
Representation.
Reads Friedrich Lange’s History of Materialism.
Meets Richard Wagner.
On Ritschl’s recommendation is appointed professor of classical
philology at Basle at the age of twenty-four before completing
his doctorate (which is then conferred without a dissertation);
begins frequent visits to the Wagner residence at Tribschen.
Serves as a medical orderly in the Franco-Prussian war;
contracts a serious illness and so serves only two months.
Writes “The Dionysiac World View.”

xxix

Chronology

















Publishes his ﬁrst book, The Birth of Tragedy; its dedicatory
preface to Richard Wagner claims for art the role of “the highest
task and truly metaphysical activity of this life”; devastating
reviews follow.
Publishes “David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer,” the
ﬁrst of his Untimely Meditations; begins taking books on natural
science out of the Basle library, whereas he had previously
conﬁned himself largely to books on philological matters. Writes
“On Truth and Lying in a Non-Moral Sense.”
Publishes two more Meditations, “The Uses and Disadvantages
of History for Life” and “Schopenhauer as Educator.”
Publishes the fourth Meditation, “Richard Wagner in
Bayreuth,” which already bears subtle signs of his movement
away from Wagner.
Publishes Human, All Too Human (dedicated to the memory of
Voltaire); it praises science over art as the mark of high culture
and thus marks a decisive turn away from Wagner.
Terrible health problems force him to resign his chair at Basle
(with a small pension); publishes “Assorted Opinions and
Maxims,” the ﬁrst part of vol. II of Human, All Too Human;
begins living alone in Swiss and Italian boarding-houses.
Publishes “The Wanderer and His Shadow,” which becomes
the second part of vol. II of Human, All Too Human.
Publishes Daybreak.
Publishes Idylls of Messina (eight poems) in a monthly magazine;
publishes The Gay Science; friendship with Paul Ree and
Lou Andreas-Salomé ends badly, leaving Nietzsche devastated.
Publishes the ﬁrst two parts of Thus Spoke Zarathustra; learns
of Wagner’s death just after mailing part one to the publisher.
Publishes the third part of Thus Spoke Zarathustra.
Publishes the fourth part of Zarathustra for private circulation
only.
Publishes Beyond Good and Evil; writes prefaces for new releases
of: The Birth of Tragedy, Human, All Too Human, vols. I and II,
and Daybreak.

xxx

Chronology







Publishes expanded edition of The Gay Science with a new
preface, a ﬁfth part, and an appendix of poems; publishes Hymn
to Life, a musical work for chorus and orchestra; publishes On
the Genealogy of Morality.
Publishes The Case of Wagner, composes a collection of poems,
Dionysian Dithyrambs, and four short books: Twilight of Idols,
The Antichrist, Ecce Homo, and Nietzsche contra Wagner.
Collapses physically and mentally in Turin on  January; writes
a few lucid notes but never recovers sanity; is brieﬂy
institutionalized; spends remainder of his life as an invalid,
living with his mother and then his sister, who also gains control
of his literary estate.
Dies in Weimar on  August.

xxxi

Further reading
There is a good deal of material in Nietzsche’s unpublished notes that
makes interesting supplementary reading for the study of BGE. It can be
found in vols. VII/ and VII/ of Werke: Kritische Gesamtausgabe, ed.
G. Colli and M. Montinari (de Gruyter: Berlin, ). Also very useful
is vol. XIV of Sämtliche Werke: Kritische Studienausgabe, ed. G. Colli and
M. Montinari (de Gruyter: Berlin and Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag:
Munich, ), pp. –, which contains earlier and often much more
extensive versions of many of the aphorisms collected in BGE. This material is not yet available in the Kritische Gesamtausgabe. Nietzsche’s own
assessment of the aims and merits of BGE can be found in his late autobiographical work Ecce Homo, written in  and published in .
The literature on Nietzsche is immense, though there are almost no
books and very few articles dealing directly and exclusively with BGE.
Titles worth mentioning would be: A. Nehemas, “Will to Knowledge,
Will to Ignorance, and Will to Power in ‘Beyond Good and Evil,’” in
Y. Yovel, ed., Nietzsche as Afﬁrmative Thinker (Reidel Publishing Company: Dordrecht, Boston, and Lancaster, ), pp. –; P. J. van
Tongeren, Die Moral von Nietzsche’s Moralkritik. Beitrag zu einem
Kommentar von Nietzsches “Jenseits von Gut und Böse” (Bouvier Verlag:
Bonn, ); and D. B. Allison, “A Diet of Worms: Aposiopetic Rhetoric
in ‘Beyond Good and Evil,’” Nietzsche Studien  (), pp. –.
Some people might ﬁnd it rewarding to approach Nietzsche’s thought
before reading about its biographical background. There are quite a
number of interesting and well-researched (German) biographies, of
which the best known are C. P. Janz, Friedrich Nietzsche. Biographie,
 vols. (Hanser Verlag: Munich, –), W. Ross, Der ängstliche Adler
xxxii

Further reading
(Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt: Stuttgart, ), and R. Safranski, Nietzsche.
Biographie seines Denkens (Hanser Verlag: Munich, ). All of these
works discuss aspects of BGE as well.
Nietzsche, his themes, and his topics have been subject to some very different interpretations, depending on the philosophical tradition in which
the interpreter is located. This has led to quite interesting “regional”
schools of interpretation, especially with respect to the will-to-power
doctrine and to Nietzsche’s epistemological views, topics which surface
prominently in BGE. These schools are best characterized in geographical
terms as “German,” “French,” and “Anglo-American.” The best-known
and most inﬂuential representative of the “German,” metaphysically oriented school is Martin Heidegger, whose two-volume study Nietzsche
(Neske: Pfullingen, ; English translation: Harper and Row: New
York, ) had an enormous impact on the discussion about Nietzsche
and his role in the history of metaphysics, at least in parts of Europe.
The “French” school, which tends to be more interested in the destructive or “deconstructive” motives in Nietzsche’s thought, is impressively
represented in the works of Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche et la philosophie
(Presses Universitaires de France: Paris, ), and Nietzsche (Presses
Universitaires de France: Paris, ), P. Klossovski, Nietzsche et le cercle
vicieux (Mercure de France: Paris, ), and S. Kofman, Nietzsche et la
metaphore (Editions Payot: Paris, ). Their books have led to lively controversies not only about speciﬁc Nietzschean views but also about how to
read Nietzsche at all. The “Anglo-American” school seems to be mainly
interested in integrating Nietzsche into the gallery of “serious” thinkers,
committed to what their emissaries take to be the normal standards of
rationality. Convincing examples of this approach are A. Nehemas,
Nietzsche: Life as Literature (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, ),
and M. Clark, Nietzsche on Truth and Philosophy (Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, ). All of these schools and all the books mentioned
have interesting things to say on many aspects of Nietzsche’s views that
are expressed in BGE.

xxxiii

Note on the text
The translation follows the German text as printed in the critical edition
of Nietzsche’s works edited by G. Colli and M. Montinari (de Gruyter:
Berlin, –). The footnotes are not meant to provide a commentary
to Nietzsche’s text. They are restricted to () translations of phrases
and terms from foreign languages, () explanations of peculiarities of
Nietzsche’s German terminology, and () some comments on material
used or alluded to by Nietzsche. The glossary of names on pp. –
contains short descriptions of all persons mentioned in the text. The
notes and the glossary make use of information supplied by vols. XIV
and XV of Sämtliche Werke: Kritische Studienausgabe, ed. G. Colli and
M. Montinari,  vols. (de Gruyter: Berlin and Deutscher Taschenbuch
Verlag: Munich, ). They are the joint product of Dina Emundts,
Rolf-Peter Horstmann, and Judith Norman.
The translator would like to thank all the people whose advice and suggestions have helped with the project. In particular, Alistair Welchman,
Thomas Sebastian, Rolf-Peter Horstmann, and Karl Ameriks have provided considerable assistance with the translation, and Richard, Caroline,
and Sara Norman, and Alistair Welchman have given invaluable encouragement and support. Their contribution to the project is gratefully
acknowledged.

xxxiv

Beyond Good and Evil
Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future

Preface
Suppose that truth is a woman – and why not? Aren’t there reasons for
suspecting that all philosophers, to the extent that they have been dogmatists, have not really understood women? That the grotesque seriousness
of their approach towards the truth and the clumsy advances they have
made so far are unsuitable ways of pressing their suit with a woman? What
is certain is that she has spurned them – leaving dogmatism of all types
standing sad and discouraged. If it is even left standing! Because there are
those who make fun of dogmatism, claiming that it has fallen over, that
it is lying ﬂat on its face, or more, that dogmatism is in its last gasps. But
seriously, there are good reasons for hoping that all dogmatizing in philosophy was just noble (though childish) ambling and preambling, however
solemn, settled and decisive it might have seemed. And perhaps the time
is very near when we will realize again and again just what actually served
as the cornerstone of those sublime and unconditional philosophical
ediﬁces that the dogmatists used to build – some piece of folk superstition from time immemorial (like the soul-superstition that still causes
trouble as the superstition of the subject or I), some word-play perhaps, a
seduction of grammar or an over-eager generalization from facts that are
really very local, very personal, very human-all-too-human. Let us hope
that the dogmatists’ philosophy was only a promise over the millennia, as
was the case even earlier with astrology, in whose service perhaps more labor, money, ingenuity, and patience was expended than for any real science
so far. We owe the great style of architecture in Asia and Egypt to astrology and its “supernatural” claims. It seems that all great things, in order
to inscribe eternal demands in the heart of humanity, must ﬁrst wander
the earth under monstrous and terrifying masks; dogmatic philosophy


Beyond Good and Evil
was this sort of a mask: the Vedanta doctrine in Asia, for example, or
Platonism in Europe. We should not be ungrateful towards dogmatism,
but it must nonetheless be said that the worst, most prolonged, and most
dangerous of all errors to this day was a dogmatist’s error, namely Plato’s
invention of pure spirit and the Good in itself. But now that it has been
overcome, and Europe breathes a sigh of relief after this nightmare, and
at least can enjoy a healthier – well – sleep, we, whose task is wakefulness
itself, are the heirs to all the force cultivated through the struggle against
this error. Of course: talking about spirit and the Good like Plato did
meant standing truth on its head and disowning even perspectivism, which
is the fundamental condition of all life. In fact, as physicians we could ask:
“How could such a disease infect Plato, the most beautiful outgrowth of
antiquity? Did the evil Socrates corrupt him after all? was Socrates in fact
the corrupter of youth? did he deserve his hemlock?” – But the struggle
against Plato, or, to use a clear and “popular” idiom, the struggle against
the Christian-ecclesiastical pressure of millennia – since Christianity is
Platonism for the “people” – has created a magniﬁcent tension of spirit
in Europe, the likes of which the earth has never known: with such a
tension in our bow we can now shoot at the furthest goals. Granted, the
European experiences this tension as a crisis or state of need; and twice
already there have been attempts, in a grand fashion, to unbend the bow,
once through Jesuitism, and the second time through the democratic
Enlightenment: – which, with the help of freedom of the press and circulation of newspapers, might really insure that spirit does not experience
itself so readily as “need”! (Germans invented gunpowder – all honors
due! But they made up for it – they invented the press.) But we, who
are neither Jesuits nor democrats, nor even German enough, we good
Europeans and free, very free spirits – we still have it, the whole need of
spirit and the whole tension of its bow! And perhaps the arrow too, the
task, and – who knows? the goal . . .
Sils-Maria, Upper Engadine,
June, 



Part  On the prejudices of philosophers

The will to truth that still seduces us into taking so many risks, this famous
truthfulness that all philosophers so far have talked about with veneration:
what questions this will to truth has already laid before us! What strange,
terrible, questionable questions! That is already a long story – and yet
it seems to have hardly begun? Is it any wonder if we ﬁnally become
suspicious, lose patience, turn impatiently away? That we ourselves are
also learning from this Sphinx to pose questions? Who is it really that
questions us here? What in us really wills the truth? In fact, we paused
for a long time before the question of the cause of this will – until we
ﬁnally came to a complete standstill in front of an even more fundamental
question. We asked about the value of this will. Granted, we will truth:
why not untruth instead? And uncertainty? Even ignorance? The problem
of the value of truth came before us, – or was it we who came before the
problem? Which of us is Oedipus? Which one is the Sphinx? It seems
we have a rendezvous of questions and question-marks. – And, believe it
or not, it ultimately looks to us as if the problem has never been raised
until now, – as if we were the ﬁrst to ever see it, ﬁx our gaze on it, risk it.
Because this involves risk and perhaps no risk has ever been greater.


“How could anything originate out of its opposite? Truth from error, for
instance? Or the will to truth from the will to deception? Or selﬂess action from self-interest? Or the pure, sun-bright gaze of wisdom from a
covetous leer? Such origins are impossible, and people who dream about


Beyond Good and Evil
such things are fools – at best. Things of the highest value must have
another, separate origin of their own, – they cannot be derived from this
ephemeral, seductive, deceptive, lowly world, from this mad chaos of confusion and desire. Look instead to the lap of being, the everlasting, the
hidden God, the ‘thing-in-itself ’ – this is where their ground must be, and
nowhere else!” – This way of judging typiﬁes the prejudices by which
metaphysicians of all ages can be recognized: this type of valuation lies behind all their logical procedures. From these “beliefs” they try to acquire
their “knowledge,” to acquire something that will end up being solemnly
christened as “the truth.” The fundamental belief of metaphysicians is
the belief in oppositions of values. It has not occurred to even the most
cautious of them to start doubting right here at the threshold, where it is
actually needed the most – even though they had vowed to themselves “de
omnibus dubitandum.” But we can doubt, ﬁrst, whether opposites even
exist and, second, whether the popular valuations and value oppositions
that have earned the metaphysicians’ seal of approval might not only be
foreground appraisals. Perhaps they are merely provisional perspectives,
perhaps they are not even viewed head-on; perhaps they are even viewed
from below, like a frog-perspective, to borrow an expression that painters
will recognize. Whatever value might be attributed to truth, truthfulness,
and selﬂessness, it could be possible that appearance, the will to deception,
and craven self-interest should be accorded a higher and more fundamental value for all life. It could even be possible that whatever gives value
to those good and honorable things has an incriminating link, bond, or
tie to the very things that look like their evil opposites; perhaps they are
even essentially the same. Perhaps! – But who is willing to take charge
of such a dangerous Perhaps! For this we must await the arrival of a new
breed of philosophers, ones whose taste and inclination are somehow the
reverse of those we have seen so far – philosophers of the dangerous Perhaps in every sense. – And in all seriousness: I see these new philosophers
approaching.


I have kept a close eye on the philosophers and read between their lines
for long enough to say to myself: the greatest part of conscious thought


Cf. Human, All too Human, I, §.



Everything is to be doubted.



On the prejudices of philosophers
must still be attributed to instinctive activity, and this is even the case for
philosophical thought. This issue needs re-examination in the same way
that heredity and “innate characteristics” have been re-examined. Just
as the act of birth makes no difference to the overall course of heredity,
neither is “consciousness” opposed to instinct in any decisive sense – most
of a philosopher’s conscious thought is secretly directed and forced into
determinate channels by the instincts. Even behind all logic and its autocratic posturings stand valuations or, stated more clearly, physiological
requirements for the preservation of a particular type of life. For example,
that the determinate is worth more than the indeterminate, appearance
worth less than the “truth”: despite all their regulative importance for
us, these sorts of appraisals could still be just foreground appraisals, a
particular type of niaiserie, precisely what is needed for the preservation
of beings like us. But this assumes that it is not man who is the “measure
of things” . . .


We do not consider the falsity of a judgment as itself an objection to a judgment; this is perhaps where our new language will sound most foreign. The
question is how far the judgment promotes and preserves life, how well it
preserves, and perhaps even cultivates, the type. And we are fundamentally inclined to claim that the falsest judgments (which include synthetic
judgments a priori) are the most indispensable to us, and that without accepting the ﬁctions of logic, without measuring reality against the wholly
invented world of the unconditioned and self-identical, without a constant
falsiﬁcation of the world through numbers, people could not live – that a
renunciation of false judgments would be a renunciation of life, a negation
of life. To acknowledge untruth as a condition of life: this clearly means
resisting the usual value feelings in a dangerous manner; and a philosophy that risks such a thing would by that gesture alone place itself beyond
good and evil.


What goads us into regarding all philosophers with an equal measure of
mistrust and mockery is not that we are struck repeatedly by how innocent


Silliness.



Beyond Good and Evil
they are – how often and easily they err and stray, in short, their childish
childlikeness – but rather that there is not enough genuine honesty about
them: even though they all make a huge, virtuous racket as soon as the
problem of truthfulness is even remotely touched upon. They all act as if
they had discovered and arrived at their genuine convictions through the
self-development of a cold, pure, divinely insouciant dialectic (in contrast
to the mystics of every rank, who are more honest than the philosophers
and also sillier – they talk about “inspiration” –): while what essentially
happens is that they take a conjecture, a whim, an “inspiration” or, more
typically, they take some fervent wish that they have sifted through and
made properly abstract – and they defend it with rationalizations after
the fact. They are all advocates who do not want to be seen as such; for
the most part, in fact, they are sly spokesmen for prejudices that they
christen as “truths” – and very far indeed from the courage of conscience
that confesses to this fact, this very fact; and very far from having the good
taste of courage that also lets this be known, perhaps to warn a friend or
foe, or out of a high-spirited attempt at self-satire. The stiff yet demure
tartuffery used by the old Kant to lure us along the clandestine, dialectical
path that leads the way (or rather: astray) to his “categorical imperative” –
this spectacle provides no small amusement for discriminating spectators
like us, who keep a close eye on the cunning tricks of the old moralists and
preachers of morals. Or even that hocus pocus of a mathematical form
used by Spinoza to arm and outﬁt his philosophy (a term which, when all
is said and done, really means “his love of wisdom”) and thus, from the
very start, to strike terror into the heart of the attacker who would dare to
cast a glance at the unconquerable maiden and Pallas Athena: – how much
personal timidity and vulnerability this sick hermit’s masquerade reveals!


I have gradually come to realize what every great philosophy so far has
been: a confession of faith on the part of its author, and a type of involuntary and unself-conscious memoir; in short, that the moral (or immoral)
intentions in every philosophy constitute the true living seed from which
the whole plant has always grown. Actually, to explain how the strangest
metaphysical claims of a philosopher really come about, it is always good
(and wise) to begin by asking: what morality is it (is he –) getting at? Consequently, I do not believe that a “drive for knowledge” is the father of


On the prejudices of philosophers
philosophy, but rather that another drive, here as elsewhere, used knowledge (and mis-knowledge!) merely as a tool. But anyone who looks at
people’s basic drives, to see how far they may have played their little game
right here as inspiring geniuses (or daemons or sprites –), will ﬁnd that
they all practiced philosophy at some point, – and that every single one
of them would be only too pleased to present itself as the ultimate purpose of existence and as rightful master of all the other drives. Because
every drive craves mastery, and this leads it to try philosophizing. – Of
course: with scholars, the truly scientiﬁc people, things might be different – “better” if you will –, with them, there might really be something
like a drive for knowledge, some independent little clockwork mechanism
that, once well wound, ticks bravely away without essentially involving the
rest of the scholar’s drives. For this reason, the scholar’s real “interests”
usually lie somewhere else entirely, with the family, or earning money,
or in politics; in fact, it is almost a matter of indifference whether his
little engine is put to work in this or that ﬁeld of research, and whether
the “promising” young worker turns himself into a good philologist or
fungus expert or chemist: – it doesn’t signify anything about him that he
becomes one thing or the other. In contrast, there is absolutely nothing
impersonal about the philosopher; and in particular his morals bear decided and decisive witness to who he is – which means, in what order of
rank the innermost drives of his nature stand with respect to each other.


How malicious philosophers can be! I do not know anything more venomous than the joke Epicurus allowed himself against Plato and the
Platonists: he called them Dionysiokolakes. Literally, the foreground
meaning of this term is “sycophants of Dionysus” and therefore accessories of the tyrant and brown-nosers; but it also wants to say “they’re
all actors, there’s nothing genuine about them” (since Dionysokolax was a
popular term for an actor). And this second meaning is really the malice
that Epicurus hurled against Plato: he was annoyed by the magniﬁcent
style, the mise-en-scène that Plato and his students were so good at, – that
Epicurus was not so good at! He, the old schoolmaster from Samos, who
sat hidden in his little garden in Athens and wrote three hundred books,


Epicurus, Fragment .



Beyond Good and Evil
who knows? perhaps out of anger and ambition against Plato? – It took a
hundred years for Greece to ﬁnd out who this garden god Epicurus had
been. – Did it ﬁnd out?


In every philosophy there is a point where the philosopher’s “conviction”
steps onto the stage: or, to use the language of an ancient Mystery:
adventavit asinus
pulcher et fortissimus.


So you want to live “according to nature?” Oh, you noble Stoics, what a
fraud is in this phrase! Imagine something like nature, proﬂigate without measure, indifferent without measure, without purpose and regard,
without mercy and justice, fertile and barren and uncertain at the same
time, think of indifference itself as power – how could you live according to
this indifference? Living – isn’t that wanting specifically to be something
other than this nature? Isn’t living assessing, preferring, being unfair,
being limited, wanting to be different? And assuming your imperative
to “live according to nature” basically amounts to “living according to
life” – well how could you not? Why make a principle out of what you
yourselves are and must be? – But in fact, something quite different is
going on: while pretending with delight to read the canon of your law in
nature, you want the opposite, you strange actors and self-deceivers! Your
pride wants to dictate and annex your morals and ideals onto nature – yes,
nature itself –, you demand that it be nature “according to Stoa” and
you want to make all existence exist in your own image alone – as a huge
eternal gloriﬁcation and universalization of Stoicism! For all your love of
truth, you have forced yourselves so long, so persistently, and with such
hypnotic rigidity to have a false, namely Stoic, view of nature, that you
can no longer see it any other way, – and some abysmal piece of arrogance ﬁnally gives you the madhouse hope that because you know how
to tyrannize yourselves – Stoicism is self-tyranny –, nature lets itself be


“In came the ass / beautiful and very strong.” According to KSA these lines could be taken from
G. C. Lichtenberg’s Vermischte Schriften (Miscellaneous Writings) (), V, p. .



On the prejudices of philosophers
tyrannized as well: because isn’t the Stoic a piece of nature? . . . But this
is an old, eternal story: what happened back then with the Stoics still
happens today, just as soon as a philosophy begins believing in itself. It
always creates the world in its own image, it cannot do otherwise; philosophy is this tyrannical drive itself, the most spiritual will to power, to the
“creation of the world,” to the causa prima.


All over Europe these days, the problem “of the real and the apparent
world” gets taken up so eagerly and with such acuity – I would even say:
shrewdness – that you really start to think and listen; and anyone who
hears only a “will to truth” in the background here certainly does not have
the sharpest of ears. In rare and unusual cases, some sort of will to truth
might actually be at issue, some wild and adventurous streak of courage,
a metaphysician’s ambition to hold on to a lost cause, that, in the end,
will still prefer a handful of “certainty” to an entire wagonload of pretty
possibilities. There might even be puritanical fanatics of conscience who
would rather lie dying on an assured nothing than an uncertain something.
But this is nihilism, and symptomatic of a desperate soul in a state of
deadly exhaustion, however brave such virtuous posturing may appear.
With stronger, livelier thinkers, however, thinkers who still have a thirst for
life, things look different. By taking sides against appearance and speaking
about “perspective” in a newly arrogant tone, by granting their own bodies
about as little credibility as they grant the visual evidence that says “the
earth stands still,” and so, with seemingly good spirits, relinquishing their
most secure possession (since what do people believe in more securely
these days than their bodies?), who knows whether they are not basically
trying to re-appropriate something that was once possessed even more
securely, something from the old estate of a bygone faith, perhaps “the
immortal soul” or perhaps “the old God,” in short, ideas that helped
make life a bit better, which is to say stronger and more cheerful than
“modern ideas” can do? There is a mistrust of these modern ideas here,
there is a disbelief in everything built yesterday and today; perhaps it is
mixed with a bit of antipathy and contempt that can no longer stand the
bric-a-brac of concepts from the most heterogeneous sources, which is


First cause.



Beyond Good and Evil
how so-called positivism puts itself on the market these days, a disgust felt
by the more discriminating taste at the fun-fair colors and ﬂimsy scraps of
all these reality-philosophasters who have nothing new and genuine about
them except these colors. Here, I think, we should give these skeptical
anti-realists and epistemo-microscopists their just due: the instinct that
drives them away from modern reality is unassailable, – what do we care
for their retrograde shortcut! The essential thing about them is not that
they want to go “back”: but rather, that they want to get – away. A bit
more strength, ﬂight, courage, artistry: and they would want to get up and
out, – and not go back! –


It seems to me that people everywhere these days are at pains to divert
attention away from the real inﬂuence Kant exerted over German philosophy, and, in particular, wisely to overlook the value he attributed to
himself. First and foremost, Kant was proud of his table of categories,
and he said with this table in his hands: “This is the hardest thing that
ever could have been undertaken on behalf of metaphysics.” – But let us
be clear about this “could have been”! He was proud of having discovered
a new faculty in humans, the faculty of synthetic judgments a priori. Of
course he was deceiving himself here, but the development and rapid
blossoming of German philosophy depended on this pride, and on the
competitive zeal of the younger generation who wanted, if possible, to discover something even prouder – and in any event “new faculties”! – But
the time has come for us to think this over. How are synthetic judgments
a priori possible? Kant asked himself, – and what really was his answer? By
virtue of a faculty, which is to say: enabled by an ability: unfortunately,
though, not in these few words, but rather so laboriously, reverentially,
and with such an extravagance of German frills and profundity that people failed to hear the comical niaiserie allemande  in such an answer. In
fact, people were beside themselves with joy over this new faculty, and
the jubilation reached its peak when Kant discovered yet another faculty,
a moral faculty: – because the Germans were still moral back then, and


The reference in this section is to Kant’s Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Critique of Pure Reason) (,
).



In German: Vermöge eines Vermögens.



German silliness.



On the prejudices of philosophers
very remote from Realpolitik. – The honeymoon of German philosophy
had arrived; all the young theologians of the Tübingen seminary ran off
into the bushes – they were all looking for “faculties.” And what didn’t
they ﬁnd – in that innocent, abundant, still youthful age of the German
spirit, when Romanticism, that malicious fairy, whispered, whistled, and
sang, when people did not know how to tell the difference between “discovering” and “inventing”! Above all, a faculty of the “supersensible”:
Schelling christened it intellectual intuition, and thus gratiﬁed the heart’s
desire of his basically piety-craving Germans. We can do no greater injustice to this whole high-spirited and enthusiastic movement (which was
just youthfulness, however boldly it might have clothed itself in gray and
hoary concepts) than to take it seriously or especially to treat it with moral
indignation. Enough, we grew up, – the dream faded away. There came
a time when people scratched their heads: some still scratch them today. There had been dreamers: ﬁrst and foremost – the old Kant. “By
virtue of a faculty” – he had said, or at least meant. But is that really – an
answer? An explanation? Or instead just a repetition of the question? So
how does opium cause sleep? “By virtue of a faculty,” namely the virtus
dormitiva – replies the doctor in Molière,
quia est in eo virtus dormitiva,
cujus est natura sensus assoupire.

But answers like this belong in comedy, and the time has ﬁnally come
to replace the Kantian question “How are synthetic judgments a priori
possible?” with another question, “Why is the belief in such judgments
necessary?” – to realize, in other words, that such judgments must be
believed true for the purpose of preserving beings of our type; which
is why these judgments could of course still be false! Or, to be blunt,
basic and clearer still: synthetic judgments a priori do not have “to be
possible” at all: we have no right to them, and in our mouths they are
nothing but false judgments. It is only the belief in their truth that is
necessary as a foreground belief and piece of visual evidence, belonging
to the perspectival optics of life. – And, ﬁnally, to recall the enormous
effect that “the German philosophy” – its right to these quotation marks


A reference to Hegel, Hölderlin, and Schelling.



In German: “‘ﬁnden’ und ‘erﬁnden.’ ”



“Because there is a dormative virtue in it / whose nature is to put the senses to sleep.” From
Molière’s Le Malade imaginaire (The Hypochondriac) ().



Beyond Good and Evil
is, I hope, understood? – has had all over Europe, a certain virtus dormitiva
has undoubtedly had a role: the noble idlers, the virtuous, the mystics,
artists, three-quarter-Christians, and political obscurantists of all nations
were all delighted to have, thanks to German philosophy, an antidote to
the still overpowering sensualism that was spilling over into this century
from the previous one, in short – “sensus assoupire” . . .


As far as materialistic atomism goes: this is one of the most well-refuted
things in existence. In Europe these days, nobody in the scholarly community is likely to be so unscholarly as to attach any real signiﬁcance to
it, except as a handy household tool (that is, as an abbreviated ﬁgure of
speech). For this, we can thank that Pole, Boscovich, who, together with
the Pole, Copernicus, was the greatest, most successful opponent of the
visual evidence. While Copernicus convinced us to believe, contrary to
all our senses, that the earth does not stand still, Boscovich taught us to
renounce belief in the last bit of earth that did “stand still,” the belief in
“matter,” in the “material,” in the residual piece of earth and clump of an
atom: it was the greatest triumph over the senses that the world had ever
known. – But we must go further still and declare war – a ruthless ﬁght
to the ﬁnish – on the “atomistic need” that, like the more famous “metaphysical need,” still leads a dangerous afterlife in regions where nobody
would think to look. First of all, we must also put an end to that other
and more disastrous atomism, the one Christianity has taught best and
longest, the atomism of the soul. Let this expression signify the belief that
the soul is something indestructible, eternal, indivisible, that it is a monad,
an atomon: this belief must be thrown out of science! Between you and
me, there is absolutely no need to give up “the soul” itself, and relinquish
one of the oldest and most venerable hypotheses – as often happens with
naturalists: given their clumsiness, they barely need to touch “the soul”
to lose it. But the path lies open for new versions and sophistications of
the soul hypothesis – and concepts like the “mortal soul” and the “soul as
subject-multiplicity” and the “soul as a society constructed out of drives
and affects” want henceforth to have civil rights in the realm of science.
By putting an end to the superstition that until now has grown around the
idea of the soul with an almost tropical luxuriance, the new psychologist
clearly thrusts himself into a new wasteland and a new suspicion. The


On the prejudices of philosophers
old psychologists might have found things easier and more enjoyable –:
but, in the end, the new psychologist knows by this very token that he is
condemned to invention – and, who knows? perhaps to discovery. –


Physiologists should think twice before positioning the drive for selfpreservation as the cardinal drive of an organic being. Above all, a living
thing wants to discharge its strength – life itself is will to power –: selfpreservation is only one of the indirect and most frequent consequences of
this. – In short, here as elsewhere, watch out for superﬂuous teleological
principles! – such as the drive for preservation (which we owe to Spinoza’s
inconsistency –). This is demanded by method, which must essentially
be the economy of principles.


Now it is beginning to dawn on maybe ﬁve or six brains that physics
too is only an interpretation and arrangement of the world (according to
ourselves! if I may say so) and not an explanation of the world. But to the
extent that physics rests on belief in the senses, it passes for more, and will
continue to pass for more, namely for an explanation, for a long time to
come. It has our eyes and our ﬁngers as its allies, it has visual evidence and
tangibility as its allies. This helped it to enchant, persuade, convince an
age with a basically plebeian taste – indeed, it instinctively follows the
canon of truth of the eternally popular sensualism. What is plain, what
“explains”? Only what can be seen and felt, – this is as far as any problem
has to be pursued. Conversely: the strong attraction of the Platonic way
of thinking consisted in its opposition to precisely this empiricism. It was
a noble way of thinking, suitable perhaps for people who enjoyed even
stronger and more discriminating senses than our contemporaries, but
who knew how to ﬁnd a higher triumph in staying master over these
senses. And they did this by throwing drab, cold, gray nets of concepts
over the brightly colored whirlwind of the senses – the rabble of the
senses, as Plato said. There was a type of enjoyment in overpowering



Nietzsche is again making a pun by contrasting the terms Erﬁnden (invention) and Finden
(discovery).
Cf. Nomoi (Laws) a–b.



Beyond Good and Evil
and interpreting the world in the manner of Plato, different from the
enjoyment offered by today’s physicists, or by the Darwinians and antiteleologists who work in physiology, with their principle of the “smallest
possible force” and greatest possible stupidity. “Where man has nothing
more to see and grasp, he has nothing more to do” – this imperative is
certainly different from the Platonic one, but for a sturdy, industrious
race of machinists and bridge-builders of the future, people with tough
work to do, it just might be the right imperative for the job.


To study physiology with a good conscience, we must insist that the sense
organs are not appearances in the way idealist philosophy uses that term:
as such, they certainly could not be causes! Sensualism, therefore, at least
as a regulative principle, if not as a heuristic principle. – What? and other
people even say that the external world is the product of our organs? But
then our body, as a piece of this external world, would really be the product
of our organs! But then our organs themselves would really be – the product of our organs! This looks to me like a thorough reductio ad absurdum:
given that the concept of a causa sui is something thoroughly absurd. So
does it follow that the external world is not the product of our organs –?


There are still harmless self-observers who believe in the existence of
“immediate certainties,” such as “I think,” or the “I will” that was Schopenhauer’s superstition: just as if knowledge had been given an object here
to seize, stark naked, as a “thing-in-itself,” and no falsiﬁcation took place
from either the side of the subject or the side of the object. But I will say
this a hundred times: “immediate certainty,” like “absolute knowledge”
and the “thing in itself ” contains a contradictio in adjecto. For once and
for all, we should free ourselves from the seduction of words! Let the
people believe that knowing means knowing to the very end; the philosopher has to say: “When I dissect the process expressed in the proposition


Reduction to an absurdity (contradiction).



Cause of itself.



Contradiction in terms.



On the prejudices of philosophers
‘I think,’ I get a whole set of bold claims that are difﬁcult, perhaps impossible, to establish, – for instance, that I am the one who is thinking, that
there must be something that is thinking in the ﬁrst place, that thinking is
an activity and the effect of a being who is considered the cause, that there
is an ‘I,’ and ﬁnally, that it has already been determined what is meant
by thinking, – that I know what thinking is. Because if I had not already
made up my mind what thinking is, how could I tell whether what had
just happened was not perhaps ‘willing’ or ‘feeling’? Enough: this ‘I think’
presupposes that I compare my present state with other states that I have
seen in myself, in order to determine what it is: and because of this retrospective comparison with other types of ‘knowing,’ this present state has
absolutely no ‘immediate certainty’ for me.” – In place of that “immediate certainty” which may, in this case, win the faith of the people, the
philosopher gets handed a whole assortment of metaphysical questions,
genuinely probing intellectual questions of conscience, such as: “Where
do I get the concept of thinking from? Why do I believe in causes and
effects? What gives me the right to speak about an I, and, for that matter, about an I as cause, and, ﬁnally, about an I as the cause of thoughts?”
Whoever dares to answer these metaphysical questions right away with an
appeal to a sort of intuitive knowledge, like the person who says: “I think
and know that at least this is true, real, certain” – he will ﬁnd the philosopher of today ready with a smile and two question-marks. “My dear sir,”
the philosopher will perhaps give him to understand, “it is improbable
that you are not mistaken: but why insist on the truth?” –


As far as the superstitions of the logicians are concerned: I will not stop
emphasizing a tiny little fact that these superstitious men are loath to
admit: that a thought comes when “it” wants, and not when “I” want.
It is, therefore, a falsiﬁcation of the facts to say that the subject “I” is
the condition of the predicate “think.” It thinks: but to say the “it” is
just that famous old “I” – well that is just an assumption or opinion, to
put it mildly, and by no means an “immediate certainty.” In fact, there
is already too much packed into the “it thinks”: even the “it” contains
an interpretation of the process, and does not belong to the process itself.
People are following grammatical habits here in drawing conclusions,
reasoning that “thinking is an activity, behind every activity something is


Beyond Good and Evil
active, therefore –.” Following the same basic scheme, the older atomism
looked behind every “force” that produces effects for that little lump
of matter in which the force resides, and out of which the effects are
produced, which is to say: the atom. More rigorous minds ﬁnally learned
how to make do without that bit of “residual earth,” and perhaps one
day even logicians will get used to making do without this little “it” (into
which the honest old I has disappeared).


That a theory is refutable is, frankly, not the least of its charms: this
is precisely how it attracts the more reﬁned intellects. The theory of
“free will,” which has been refuted a hundred times, appears to owe its
endurance to this charm alone –: somebody will always come along and
feel strong enough to refute it.


Philosophers tend to talk about the will as if it were the most familiar
thing in the world. In fact, Schopenhauer would have us believe that the
will is the only thing that is really familiar, familiar through and through,
familiar without pluses or minuses. But I have always thought that, here
too, Schopenhauer was only doing what philosophers always tend to do:
adopting and exaggerating a popular prejudice. Willing strikes me as, above
all, something complicated, something uniﬁed only in a word – and this
single word contains the popular prejudice that has overruled whatever
minimal precautions philosophers might take. So let us be more cautious,
for once – let us be “unphilosophical.” Let us say: in every act of willing
there is, to begin with, a plurality of feelings, namely: the feeling of the
state away from which, the feeling of the state towards which, and the feeling
of this “away from” and “towards” themselves. But this is accompanied
by a feeling of the muscles that comes into play through a sort of habit
as soon as we “will,” even without our putting “arms and legs” into
motion. Just as feeling – and indeed many feelings – must be recognized
as ingredients of the will, thought must be as well. In every act of will
there is a commandeering thought, – and we really should not believe
this thought can be divorced from the “willing,” as if some will would
then be left over! Third, the will is not just a complex of feeling and


On the prejudices of philosophers
thinking; rather, it is fundamentally an affect: and speciﬁcally the affect
of the command. What is called “freedom of the will” is essentially the
affect of superiority with respect to something that must obey: “I am
free, ‘it’ must obey” – this consciousness lies in every will, along with
a certain straining of attention, a straight look that ﬁxes on one thing
and one thing only, an unconditional evaluation “now this is necessary
and nothing else,” an inner certainty that it will be obeyed, and whatever
else comes with the position of the commander. A person who wills –,
commands something inside himself that obeys, or that he believes to
obey. But now we notice the strangest thing about the will – about this
multifarious thing that people have only one word for. On the one hand,
we are, under the circumstances, both the one who commands and the
one who obeys, and as the obedient one we are familiar with the feelings
of compulsion, force, pressure, resistance, and motion that generally start
right after the act of willing. On the other hand, however, we are in the
habit of ignoring and deceiving ourselves about this duality by means of
the synthetic concept of the “I.” As a result, a whole chain of erroneous
conclusions, and, consequently, false evaluations have become attached
to the will, – to such an extent that the one who wills believes, in good
faith, that willing sufﬁces for action. Since it is almost always the case that
there is will only where the effect of command, and therefore obedience,
and therefore action, may be expected, the appearance translates into the
feeling, as if there were a necessity of effect. In short, the one who wills
believes with a reasonable degree of certainty that will and action are
somehow one; he attributes the success, the performance of the willing
to the will itself, and consequently enjoys an increase in the feeling of
power that accompanies all success. “Freedom of the will” – that is the
word for the multi-faceted state of pleasure of one who commands and, at
the same time, identiﬁes himself with the accomplished act of willing. As
such, he enjoys the triumph over resistances, but thinks to himself that it
was his will alone that truly overcame the resistance. Accordingly, the one
who wills takes his feeling of pleasure as the commander, and adds to it
the feelings of pleasure from the successful instruments that carry out the
task, as well as from the useful “under-wills” or under-souls – our body
is, after all, only a society constructed out of many souls –. L’effet c’est
moi: what happens here is what happens in every well-constructed and


The effect is I.



Beyond Good and Evil
happy community: the ruling class identiﬁes itself with the successes of
the community. All willing is simply a matter of commanding and obeying,
on the groundwork, as I have said, of a society constructed out of many
“souls”: from which a philosopher should claim the right to understand
willing itself within the framework of morality: morality understood as
a doctrine of the power relations under which the phenomenon of “life”
arises. –


That individual philosophical concepts are not arbitrary and do not grow
up on their own, but rather grow in reference and relation to each other;
that however suddenly and randomly they seem to emerge in the history
of thought, they still belong to a system just as much as all the members
of the fauna of a continent do: this is ultimately revealed by the certainty
with which the most diverse philosophers will always ﬁll out a deﬁnite
basic scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they will
each start out anew, only to end up revolving in the same orbit once again.
However independent of each other they might feel themselves to be, with
their critical or systematic wills, something inside of them drives them
on, something leads them into a particular order, one after the other, and
this something is precisely the innate systematicity and relationship of
concepts. In fact, their thinking is not nearly as much a discovery as it is
a recognition, remembrance, a returning and homecoming into a distant,
primordial, total economy of the soul, from which each concept once
grew: – to this extent, philosophizing is a type of atavism of the highest
order. The strange family resemblance of all Indian, Greek, and German
philosophizing speaks for itself clearly enough. Where there are linguistic
afﬁnities, then because of the common philosophy of grammar (I mean:
due to the unconscious domination and direction through similar grammatical functions), it is obvious that everything lies ready from the very
start for a similar development and sequence of philosophical systems;
on the other hand, the way seems as good as blocked for certain other
possibilities of interpreting the world. Philosophers of the Ural-Altaic
language group (where the concept of the subject is the most poorly developed) are more likely to “see the world” differently, and to be found on
paths different from those taken by the Indo-Germans or Muslims: the
spell of particular grammatical functions is in the last analysis the spell of


On the prejudices of philosophers
physiological value judgments and racial conditioning. – So much towards
a rejection of Locke’s superﬁciality with regard to the origin of ideas.


The causa sui is the best self-contradiction that has ever been conceived,
a type of logical rape and abomination. But humanity’s excessive pride has
got itself profoundly and horribly entangled with precisely this piece of
nonsense. The longing for “freedom of the will” in the superlative metaphysical sense (which, unfortunately, still rules in the heads of the halfeducated), the longing to bear the entire and ultimate responsibility for
your actions yourself and to relieve God, world, ancestors, chance, and society of the burden – all this means nothing less than being that very causa
sui and, with a courage greater than Münchhausen’s, pulling yourself by
the hair from the swamp of nothingness up into existence. Suppose someone sees through the boorish naiveté of this famous concept of “free will”
and manages to get it out of his mind; I would then ask him to carry his
“enlightenment” a step further and to rid his mind of the reversal of this
misconceived concept of “free will”: I mean the “un-free will,” which is
basically an abuse of cause and effect. We should not erroneously objectify
“cause” and “effect” like the natural scientists do (and whoever else thinks
naturalistically these days –) in accordance with the dominant mechanistic stupidity which would have the cause push and shove until it “effects”
something; we should use “cause” and “effect” only as pure concepts,
which is to say as conventional ﬁctions for the purpose of description and
communication, not explanation. In the “in-itself ” there is nothing like
“causal association,” “necessity,” or “psychological un-freedom.” There,
the “effect” does not follow “from the cause,” there is no rule of “law.”
We are the ones who invented causation, succession, for-each-other, relativity, compulsion, numbers, law, freedom, grounds, purpose; and if we
project and inscribe this symbol world onto things as an “in-itself,” then
this is the way we have always done things, namely mythologically. The
“un-free will” is mythology; in real life it is only a matter of strong and
weak wills. It is almost always a symptom of what is lacking in a thinker
when he senses some compulsion, need, having-to-follow, pressure, unfreedom in every “causal connection” and “psychological necessity.” It is


Cause of itself.



Beyond Good and Evil
very telling to feel this way – the person tells on himself. And in general,
if I have observed correctly, “un-freedom of the will” is regarded as a
problem by two completely opposed parties, but always in a profoundly
personal manner. The one party would never dream of relinquishing their
“responsibility,” a belief in themselves, a personal right to their own merit
(the vain races belong to this group –). Those in the other party, on the
contrary, do not want to be responsible for anything or to be guilty of
anything; driven by an inner self-contempt, they long to be able to shift
the blame for themselves to something else. When they write books these
days, this latter group tends to side with the criminal; a type of socialist
pity is their most attractive disguise. And, in fact, the fatalism of the weak
of will starts to look surprisingly attractive when it can present itself as
“la religion de la souffrance humaine”: this is its “good taste.”


You must forgive an old philologist like me who cannot help maliciously
putting his ﬁnger on bad tricks of interpretation: but this “conformity of
nature to law,” which you physicists are so proud of, just as if – – exists
only because of your interpretation and bad “philology.” It is not a matter
of fact, not a “text,” but instead only a naive humanitarian correction and
a distortion of meaning that you use in order to comfortably accommodate
the democratic instincts of the modern soul! “Everywhere, equality before
the law, – in this respect, nature is no different and no better off than
we are”: a lovely case of ulterior motivation; and it serves once more
to disguise the plebeian antagonism against all privilege and autocracy
together with a second and more reﬁned atheism. “Ni dieu, ni maı̂tre” –
you want this too: and therefore “hurray for the laws of nature!” – right?
But, as I have said, this is interpretation, not text; and somebody with an
opposite intention and mode of interpretation could come along and be
able to read from the same nature, and with reference to the same set of
appearances, a tyrannically ruthless and pitiless execution of power claims.
This sort of interpreter would show the unequivocal and unconditional
nature of all “will to power” so vividly and graphically that almost every
word, and even the word “tyranny,” would ultimately seem useless or
like weakening and mollifying metaphors – and too humanizing. Yet this


The religion of human suffering.



Neither God nor master.



On the prejudices of philosophers
interpreter might nevertheless end up claiming the same thing about
this world as you, namely that it follows a “necessary” and “calculable”
course, although not because laws are dominant in it, but rather because
laws are totally absent, and every power draws its ﬁnal consequences at
every moment. Granted, this is only an interpretation too – and you will
be eager enough to make this objection? – well then, so much the better.


All psychology so far has been stuck in moral prejudices and fears: it has
not ventured into the depths. To grasp psychology as morphology and
the doctrine of the development of the will to power, which is what I have
done – nobody has ever come close to this, not even in thought: this,
of course, to the extent that we are permitted to regard what has been
written so far as a symptom of what has not been said until now. The
power of moral prejudice has deeply affected the most spiritual world,
which seems like the coldest world, the one most likely to be devoid
of any presuppositions – and the effect has been manifestly harmful,
hindering, dazzling, and distorting. A genuine physio-psychology has to
contend with unconscious resistances in the heart of the researcher, it
has “the heart” against it. Even a doctrine of the reciprocal dependence
of the “good” and the “bad” drives will (as a reﬁned immorality) cause
distress and aversion in a strong and sturdy conscience – as will, to an even
greater extent, a doctrine of the derivation of all the good drives from the
bad. But suppose somebody considers even the affects of hatred, envy,
greed, and power-lust as the conditioning affects of life, as elements that
fundamentally and essentially need to be present in the total economy of
life, and consequently need to be enhanced where life is enhanced, – this
person will suffer from such a train of thought as if from sea-sickness.
And yet even this hypothesis is far from being the most uncomfortable and
unfamiliar in this enormous, practically untouched realm of dangerous
knowledge: – and there are hundreds of good reasons for people to keep
out of it, if they – can! On the other hand, if you are ever cast loose
here with your ship, well now! come on! clench your teeth! open your
eyes! and grab hold of the helm! – we are sailing straight over and away
from morality; we are crushing and perhaps destroying the remnants of
our own morality by daring to travel there – but what do we matter!
Never before have intrepid voyagers and adventurers opened up a more


Beyond Good and Evil
profound world of insight: and the psychologist who “makes sacriﬁces”
(they are not the sacriﬁzio dell’intelletto – to the contrary!) can at least
demand in return that psychology again be recognized as queen of the
sciences, and that the rest of the sciences exist to serve and prepare for
it. Because, from now on, psychology is again the path to the fundamental
problems.



Sacriﬁce of the intellect.
In German: Wissenschaften. Wissenschaft has generally been translated as “science” throughout the
text, but the German term is broader than the English, and includes the humanities as well as the
natural and social sciences.



Part  The free spirit

O sancta simplicitas! What a strange simpliﬁcation and falsiﬁcation people
live in! The wonders never cease, for those who devote their eyes to such
wondering. How we have made everything around us so bright and easy
and free and simple! How we have given our senses a carte blanche for everything superﬁcial, given our thoughts a divine craving for high-spirited
leaps and false inferences! – How we have known from the start to hold
on to our ignorance in order to enjoy a barely comprehensible freedom,
thoughtlessness, recklessness, bravery, and joy in life; to delight in life
itself ! And, until now, science could arise only on this solidiﬁed, granite
foundation of ignorance, the will to know rising up on the foundation of a
much more powerful will, the will to not know, to uncertainty, to untruth!
Not as its opposite, but rather – as its reﬁnement! Even when language,
here as elsewhere, cannot get over its crassness and keeps talking about
opposites where there are only degrees and multiple, subtle shades of
gradation; even when the ingrained tartuffery of morals (which is now
part of our “ﬂesh and blood,” and cannot be overcome) twists the words
in our mouths (we who should know better); now and then we still realize
what is happening, and laugh about how it is precisely the best science
that will best know how to keep us in this simpliﬁed, utterly artiﬁcial,




In German: der freie Geist. I have generally rendered Geist and words using Geist (such as geistig,
Geistigkeit) as “spirit” and words using spirit (so: spiritual and spirituality). However, Geist is a
broader term than spirit, meaning mind or intellect as well.
O holy simplicity.



Beyond Good and Evil
well-invented, well-falsiﬁed world, how unwillingly willing science loves
error because, being alive, – it loves life!


After such a joyful entrance, there is a serious word that I want heard;
it is intended for those who are most serious. Stand tall, you philosophers and friends of knowledge, and beware of martyrdom! Of suffering
“for the sake of truth”! Even of defending yourselves! You will ruin the
innocence and ﬁne objectivity of your conscience, you will be stubborn towards objections and red rags, you will become stupid, brutish, bullish if,
while ﬁghting against danger, viciousness, suspicion, ostracism, and even
nastier consequences of animosity, you also have to pose as the worldwide defenders of truth. As if “the Truth” were such a harmless and
bungling little thing that she needed defenders! And you of all people,
her Knights of the Most Sorrowful Countenance, my Lord Slacker and
Lord Webweaver of the Spirit! In the end, you know very well that it
does not matter whether you, of all people, are proved right, and furthermore, that no philosopher so far has ever been proved right. You also
know that every little question-mark you put after your special slogans
and favorite doctrines (and occasionally after yourselves) might contain
more truth than all the solemn gestures and trump cards laid before accusers and courts of law! So step aside instead! Run away and hide! And
be sure to have your masks and your ﬁnesse so people will mistake you for
something else, or be a bit scared of you! And do not forget the garden,
the garden with golden trelliswork! And have people around you who
are like a garden, – or like music over the waters when evening sets and
the day is just a memory. Choose the good solitude, the free, high-spirited,
light-hearted solitude that, in some sense, gives you the right to stay good
yourself ! How poisonous, how cunning, how bad you become in every
long war that cannot be waged out in the open! How personal you become
when you have been afraid for a long time, keeping your eye on enemies,
on possible enemies! These outcasts of society (the long-persecuted, the
badly harassed, as well as those forced to become hermits, the Spinozas or
Giordano Brunos): they may work under a spiritual guise, and might not
even know what they are doing, but they will always end up subtly seeking


A reference to Miguel de Cervantes’ Don Quixote ().



The free spirit
vengeance and mixing their poisons ( just try digging up the foundation
of Spinoza’s ethics and theology!). Not to mention the absurd spectacle of
moral indignation, which is an unmistakable sign that a philosopher has
lost his philosophical sense of humor. The philosopher’s martyrdom, his
“self-sacriﬁce for the truth,” brings to light the agitator and actor in him;
and since we have only ever regarded him with artistic curiosity, it is easy
to understand the dangerous wish to see many of these philosophers in
their degeneration for once (degenerated into “martyrs” or loud-mouths
on their stage or soap-box). It’s just that, with this sort of wish we have to
be clear about what we will be seeing: – only a satyr-play, only a satirical
epilogue, only the continuing proof that the long, real tragedy has come to
an end (assuming that every philosophy was originally a long tragedy – ).


Every choice human being strives instinctively for a citadel and secrecy
where he is rescued from the crowds, the many, the vast majority; where,
as the exception, he can forget the human norm. The only exception is
when he is driven straight towards this norm by an even stronger instinct,
in search of knowledge in the great and exceptional sense. Anybody who,
in dealing with people, does not occasionally glisten in all the shades of
distress, green and gray with disgust, weariness, pity, gloominess, and
loneliness – he is certainly not a person of higher taste. But if he does not
freely take on all this effort and pain, if he keeps avoiding it and remains,
as I said, placid and proud and hidden in his citadel, well then one thing
is certain: he is not made for knowledge, not predestined for it. Because
if he were, he would eventually have to say to himself: “To hell with
good taste! The norm is more interesting than the exception – than me,
the exception!” – and he would wend his way downwards, and, above all,
“inwards.” The long and serious study of the average man requires a great
deal of disguise, self-overcoming, conﬁdentiality, bad company (all company is bad company except with your equals); still, this is all a necessary
part of the life story of every philosopher, perhaps the least pleasant, most
foul-smelling part and the one richest in disappointments. But if he is
lucky, as beﬁts knowledge’s child of fortune, the philosopher will ﬁnd real
shortcuts and aids to make his work easier. I mean he will ﬁnd so-called
cynics – people who easily recognize the animal, the commonplace, the
“norm” within themselves, and yet still have a degree of spiritedness and


Beyond Good and Evil
an urge to talk about themselves and their peers in front of witnesses: –
sometimes they even wallow in books as if in their own ﬁlth. Cynicism is
the only form in which base souls touch upon that thing which is genuine
honesty. And the higher man needs to open his ears to all cynicism, crude
or reﬁned, and congratulate himself every time the buffoon speaks up
without shame, or the scientiﬁc satyr is heard right in front of him. There
are even cases where enchantment mixes with disgust: namely, where
genius, by a whim of nature, is tied to some indiscreet billy-goat and
ape, like the Abbé Galiani, the most profound, discerning, and perhaps
also the ﬁlthiest man of his century. He was much more profound than
Voltaire, and consequently a lot quieter. But, as I have already suggested,
what happens more often is that the scientiﬁc head is placed on an ape’s
body, a more subtle and exceptional understanding is put in a base soul.
This is not a rare phenomenon, particularly among physicians and physiologists of morals. And wherever even one person is speaking about man
without any bitterness but instead quite innocuously, describing him as a
stomach with dual needs and a head with one; wherever someone sees and
seeks and wants to see only hunger, sex-drive and vanity, as if these were
the sole and genuine motivating forces of human action; in short, wherever
somebody is speaking “badly” of people – and not even wickedly – this is
where the lover of knowledge should listen with subtle and studious attention. He should keep his ears open wherever people are speaking without
anger. Because the angry man, and anyone who is constantly tearing and
shredding himself with his own teeth (or, in place of himself, the world, or
God, or society), may very well stand higher than the laughing and selfsatisﬁed satyr, considered morally. But considered in any other way, he
is the more ordinary, more indifferent, less instructive case. And nobody
lies as much as the angry man. –


It is hard to be understood, particularly when you think and live gangasrotogati among people who think and live differently, namely kurmagati or
at best “walking like frogs,” mandeikagati (am I doing everything I can to
be hard to understand myself?), and you should give heartfelt thanks for


Sanskrit for “as the current of the [river] Ganges moves.”



Sanskrit for “as the tortoise moves.”



The free spirit
the goodwill apparent in any subtlety of interpretation. But as far as “good
friends” are concerned, they are always too easy-going and think that they
have a right to be easy-going, just because they are friends. So it is best to
grant them some leeway from the very start, and leave some latitude for
misunderstandings: – and then you can even laugh. Or, alternatively, get
rid of them altogether, these good friends, – and then laugh some more!


The hardest thing to translate from one language into another is the
tempo of its style, which is grounded in the character of the race, or – to
be more physiological – in the average tempo of its “metabolism.” There
are well-meaning interpretations that are practically falsiﬁcations; they
involuntarily debase the original, simply because it has a tempo that cannot
be translated – a tempo that is brave and cheerful and leaps over and out
of every danger in things and in words. Germans are almost incapable of
a presto in their language: and so it is easy to see that they are incapable
of many of the most delightful and daring nuances of free, free-spirited
thought. Since the buffo and the satyr are alien to the German in body and
in conscience, Aristophanes and Petronius are as good as untranslatable.
Everything ponderous, lumbering, solemnly awkward, every long-winded
and boring type of style is developed by the Germans in over-abundant
diversity. Forgive me for pointing out that even Goethe’s prose, with its
mixture of the stiff and the delicate, is no exception; it is both a reﬂection
of the “good old days” to which it belonged and an expression of the
German taste back when there still was a “German taste”: it was a Rococo
taste, in moribus et artibus. Lessing is an exception, thanks to his actor’s
nature that understood and excelled at so much. He was not the translator
of Bayle for nothing; he gladly took refuge in the company of Diderot and
Voltaire, and still more gladly among the Roman writers of comedy. Even
in tempo, Lessing loved free-thinking and the escape from Germany.
But how could the German language – even in the prose of a Lessing –
imitate Machiavelli’s tempo – Machiavelli who, in his Principe, lets us
breathe the ﬁne, dry air of Florence? He cannot help presenting the most
serious concerns in a boisterous allegrissimo, and is, perhaps, not without


In customs and arts.



In German: Freigeisterei.



Il Principe (The Prince) ().



Beyond Good and Evil
a malicious, artistic sense for the contrast he is risking: thoughts that are
long, hard, tough, and dangerous, and a galloping tempo and the very
best and most mischievous mood. Who, ﬁnally, would dare to translate
Petronius into German, a man who, more than any great musician so far,
was the master of the presto in inventions, ideas, and words. What do all the
swamps of the sick and wicked world – even the “ancient world” – matter
in the end for someone like him, with feet of wind, with the breath and
the force and the liberating scorn of a wind that makes everything healthy
by making everything run! And as for Aristophanes, that transﬁguring,
complementary spirit for whose sake we can forgive the whole Greek world
for existing (as long as we have realized in full depth and profundity what
needs to be forgiven and transﬁgured here): – nothing I know has given
me a better vision of Plato’s secrecy and Sphinx nature than that happily
preserved petit fait: under the pillow of his deathbed they did not ﬁnd
a “Bible” or anything Egyptian, Pythagorean, or Platonic – but instead,
Aristophanes. How would even a Plato have endured life – a Greek life
that he said No to – without an Aristophanes! –


Independence is an issue that concerns very few people: – it is a prerogative
of the strong. And even when somebody has every right to be independent,
if he attempts such a thing without having to do so, he proves that he is
probably not only strong, but brave to the point of madness. He enters
a labyrinth, he multiplies by a thousand the dangers already inherent in
the very act of living, not the least of which is the fact that no one with
eyes will see how and where he gets lost and lonely and is torn limb from
limb by some cave-Minotaur of conscience. And assuming a man like this
is destroyed, it is an event so far from human comprehension that people
do not feel it or feel for him: – and he cannot go back again! He cannot
go back to their pity again! – –


Our highest insights must – and should! – sound like stupidities, or possibly crimes, when they come without permission to people whose ears have


Little fact.



The free spirit
no afﬁnity for them and were not predestined for them. The distinction between the exoteric and the esoteric, once made by philosophers,
was found among the Indians as well as among Greeks, Persians, and
Muslims. Basically, it was found everywhere that people believed in an
order of rank and not in equality and equal rights. The difference between these terms is not that the exoteric stands outside and sees, values,
measures, and judges from this external position rather than from some
internal one. What is more essential is that the exoteric sees things up from
below – while the esoteric sees them down from above! There are heights
of the soul from whose vantage point even tragedy stops having tragic
effects; and who would dare to decide whether the collective sight of the
world’s many woes would necessarily compel and seduce us into a feeling
of pity, a feeling that would only serve to double these woes? . . . What
helps feed or nourish the higher type of man must be almost poisonous to
a very different and lesser type. The virtues of a base man could indicate
vices and weaknesses in a philosopher. If a higher type of man were to
degenerate and be destroyed, this very destruction could give him the
qualities needed to make people honor him as a saint down in the lower
realm where he has sunk. There are books that have inverse values for
soul and for health, depending on whether they are used by the lower
souls and lowlier life-forces, or by the higher and more powerful ones.
In the ﬁrst case, these books are dangerous and cause deterioration and
dissolution; in the second case, they are the heralds’ calls that summon
the most courageous to their courage. Books for the general public always
smell foul: the stench of petty people clings to them. It usually stinks
in places where the people eat and drink, even where they worship. You
should not go to church if you want to breath clean air. – –


When people are young, they admire and despise without any of that art
of nuance which is life’s greatest reward; so it is only fair that they will
come to pay dearly for having assaulted people and things like this, with
a Yes and a No. Everything is set up so that the worst possible taste, the



In German: nicht daf ür geartet. The term geartet is related to the German word Art (type), which
appears frequently in this section as well as throughout the text.
In German: dass er entartete.



Beyond Good and Evil
taste for the unconditional, gets cruelly and foolishly abused until people
learn to put some art into their feelings, and prefer the risk they run
with artiﬁce, just like real artists of life do. It seems as if the wrath and
reverence that characterize youth will not rest easy until they have falsiﬁed
people and things thoroughly enough to be able to vent themselves on
these targets. Youth is itself intrinsically falsifying and deceitful. Later,
after the young soul has been tortured by constant disappointments, it
ends up turning suspiciously on itself, still raging and wild, even in the
force of its suspicion and the pangs of its conscience. How furious it
is with itself now, how impatiently it tears itself apart, what revenge it
exacts for having blinded itself for so long, as if its blindness had been
voluntary! In this transitional state, we punish ourselves by distrusting
our feelings, we torture our enthusiasm with doubts, we experience even
a good conscience as a danger, as if it were a veil wrapped around us,
something marking the depletion of a more subtle, genuine honesty. And,
above all, we become partisan, partisan on principle against “youth.” – A
decade later, we realize that all this – was youthfulness too!


During the longest epoch of human history (which is called the prehistoric
age) an action’s value or lack of value was derived from its consequences;
the action itself was taken as little into account as its origin. Instead,
the situation was something like that of present-day China, where the
honor or dishonor of a child reﬂects back on the parents. In the same
way, it was the retroactive force of success or failure that showed people whether to think of an action as good or bad. We can call this period the pre-moral period of humanity. At that point, the imperative
“know thyself!” was still unknown. By contrast, over the course of the last
ten millennia, people across a large part of the earth have gradually come
far enough to see the origin, not the consequence, as decisive for the
value of an action. By and large, this was a great event, a considerable reﬁnement of outlook and criterion, an unconscious after-effect of the
dominance of aristocratic values and the belief in “origin,” and the sign
of a period that we can signify as moral in a narrow sense. This marks the
ﬁrst attempt at self-knowledge. Origin rather than consequence: what a
reversal of perspective! And, certainly, this reversal was only accomplished
after long struggles and ﬂuctuations! Granted: this meant that a disastrous


The free spirit
new superstition, a distinctive narrowness of interpretation gained dominance. The origin of the action was interpreted in the most determinate
sense possible, as origin out of an intention. People were united in the belief that the value of an action was exhausted by the value of its intention.
Intention as the entire origin and prehistory of an action: under this prejudice people have issued moral praise, censure, judgment, and philosophy almost to this day. – But today, thanks to a renewed self-contemplation
and deepening of humanity, shouldn’t we be facing a renewed necessity
to effect a reversal and fundamental displacement of values? Shouldn’t
we be standing on the threshold of a period that would be designated,
negatively at ﬁrst, as extra-moral? Today, when we immoralists, at least,
suspect that the decisive value is conferred by what is speciﬁcally unintentional about an action, and that all its intentionality, everything about
it that can be seen, known, or raised to “conscious awareness,” only belongs to its surface and skin – which, like every skin, reveals something
but conceals even more? In short, we believe that the intention is only a
sign and symptom that ﬁrst needs to be interpreted, and that, moreover,
it is a sign that means too many things and consequently means almost
nothing by itself. We believe that morality in the sense it has had up to now
(the morality of intentions) was a prejudice, a precipitousness, perhaps
a preliminary, a thing on about the same level as astrology and alchemy,
but in any case something that must be overcome. The overcoming of
morality – even the self-overcoming of morality, in a certain sense: let this
be the name for that long and secret labor which is reserved for the most
subtle, genuinely honest, and also the most malicious consciences of the
day, who are living touchstones of the soul. –


There is nothing else to be done: the feelings of utter devotion, of sacriﬁce
for your neighbor, and the entire morality of self-abnegation have to
be mercilessly taken to court and made to account for themselves. And
the same holds for the aesthetic of “disinterested contemplation,” the
seductive guise under which the castration of art is presently trying to
create a good conscience for itself. These feelings of “for others,” of
“not for myself,” contain far too much sugar and sorcery for us not to
need to become doubly suspicious here and ask: “Aren’t these perhaps –
seductions?” To say that these feelings are pleasing (for the one who has


Beyond Good and Evil
them, for the one who enjoys their fruits, and even for the mere onlooker)
is not yet an argument in their favor, but rather constitutes a demand for
caution. So let us be cautious!


It does not matter what philosophical standpoint you might take these
days: any way you look at it, the erroneousness of the world we think we
live in is the most certain and solid fact that our eyes can still grab hold of.
We ﬁnd reason after reason for it, reasons that might lure us into speculations about a deceptive principle in “the essence of things.” But anyone
who makes thinking itself (and therefore “the spirit”) responsible for the
falseness of the world (an honorable way out, taken by every conscious or
unconscious advocatus dei ), anyone who considers this world, together
with space, time, form, and motion, to be falsely inferred – such a person
would at the very least have ample cause to grow suspicious of thinking altogether. Hasn’t it played the biggest joke on us to date? And what
guarantee would there be that it wouldn’t keep doing what it has always
done? In all seriousness, there is something touching and awe-inspiring
about the innocence that, to this day, lets a thinker place himself in front
of consciousness with the request that it please give him honest answers:
for example, whether or not it is “real,” and why it so resolutely keeps
the external world at arm’s length, and other questions like that. The
belief in “immediate certainties” is a moral naiveté that does credit to us
philosophers: but – we should stop being “merely moral,” for once! Aside
from morality, the belief in immediate certainties is a stupidity that does
us little credit! In bourgeois life, a suspicious disposition might be a sign of
“bad character” and consequently considered unwise. But here with us,
beyond the bourgeois sphere with its Yeses and Noes, – what is to stop us
from being unwise and saying: “As the creature who has been the biggest
dupe the earth has ever seen, the philosopher pretty much has a right to
a ‘bad character.’ It is his duty to be suspicious these days, to squint as
maliciously as possible out of every abyss of mistrust.” – Forgive me for
playing jokes with this gloomy grimace and expression: because when it
comes to betrayal and being betrayed, I myself learned a long time ago to
think differently and evaluate differently; and my elbow is ready with at


Advocate of God (as opposed to the devil’s advocate).



The free spirit
least a couple of nudges for the blind rage of philosophers as they struggle
not to be betrayed. Why not? It is no more than a moral prejudice that
the truth is worth more than appearance; in fact, it is the world’s most
poorly proven assumption. Let us admit this much: that life could not exist except on the basis of perspectival valuations and appearances; and if,
with the virtuous enthusiasm and inanity of many philosophers, someone
wanted to completely abolish the “world of appearances,” – well, assuming you could do that, – at least there would not be any of your “truth”
left either! Actually, why do we even assume that “true” and “false” are
intrinsically opposed? Isn’t it enough to assume that there are levels of
appearance and, as it were, lighter and darker shades and tones of appearance – different valeurs, to use the language of painters? Why shouldn’t
the world that is relevant to us – be a ﬁction? And if someone asks: “But
doesn’t ﬁction belong with an author?” – couldn’t we shoot back: “Why?
Doesn’t this ‘belonging’ belong, perhaps, to ﬁction as well? Aren’t we
allowed to be a bit ironic with the subject, as we are with the predicate
and object? Shouldn’t philosophers rise above the belief in grammar?
With all due respect to governesses, isn’t it about time philosophy renounced governess-beliefs?” –


O Voltaire! O humanity! O nonsense! There is something to “truth,” to
the search for truth; and when a human being is too humane about it –
when “il ne cherche le vrai que pour faire le bien” – I bet he won’t ﬁnd
anything!


Assuming that our world of desires and passions is the only thing “given”
as real, that we cannot get down or up to any “reality” except the reality of
our drives (since thinking is only a relation between these drives) – aren’t
we allowed to make the attempt and pose the question as to whether
something like this “given” isn’t enough to render the so-called mechanistic (and thus material) world comprehensible as well? I do not mean
comprehensible as a deception, a “mere appearance,” a “representation”


Values.



“He looks for truth only to do good.”



Beyond Good and Evil
(in the sense of Berkeley and Schopenhauer); I mean it might allow us
to understand the mechanistic world as belonging to the same plane of
reality as our affects themselves –, as a primitive form of the world of
affect, where everything is contained in a powerful unity before branching off and organizing itself in the organic process (and, of course, being
softened and weakened –). We would be able to understand the mechanistic world as a kind of life of the drives, where all the organic functions
(self-regulation, assimilation, nutrition, excretion, and metabolism) are
still synthetically bound together – as a pre-form of life? – In the end, we
are not only allowed to make such an attempt: the conscience of method
demands it. Multiple varieties of causation should not be postulated until
the attempt to make do with a single one has been taken as far as it will
go (– ad absurdum, if you will). This is a moral of method that cannot be
escaped these days; – it follows “from the deﬁnition,” as a mathematician
would say. The question is ultimately whether we recognize the will as, in
effect, efﬁcacious, whether we believe in the causality of the will. If we do
(and this belief is really just our belief in causality itself –), then we must
make the attempt to hypothetically posit the causality of the will as the
only type of causality there is. “Will” can naturally have effects only on
“will” – and not on “matter” (not on “nerves” for instance –). Enough:
we must venture the hypothesis that everywhere “effects” are recognized,
will is effecting will – and that every mechanistic event in which a force
is active is really a force and effect of the will. – Assuming, ﬁnally, that
we succeeded in explaining our entire life of drives as the organization
and outgrowth of one basic form of will (namely, of the will to power,
which is my claim); assuming we could trace all organic functions back to
this will to power and ﬁnd that it even solved the problem of procreation
and nutrition (which is a single problem); then we will have earned the
right to clearly designate all efﬁcacious force as: will to power. The world
seen from inside, the world determined and described with respect to its
“intelligible character” – would be just this “will to power” and nothing
else. –


“What? Doesn’t that mean, to use a popular idiom: God is refuted but
the devil is not – ?” On the contrary! On the contrary, my friends! And
who the devil is forcing you to use popular idioms! –


The free spirit


This is what has ﬁnally happened, in the bright light of more recent times,
to the French Revolution, that gruesome and (on close consideration)
pointless farce: noble and enthusiastic spectators across Europe have,
from a distance, interpreted their own indignations and enthusiasms into
it, and for so long and with such passion that the text has ﬁnally disappeared
under the interpretation. In the same way, a noble posterity could again
misunderstand the entire past, and in so doing, perhaps, begin to make
it tolerable to look at. – Or rather: hasn’t this happened already? weren’t
we ourselves this “noble posterity”? And right now, since we’re realizing
this to be the case – hasn’t it stopped being so?


No one would consider a doctrine to be true just because it makes people
happy or virtuous, with the possible exception of the darling “Idealists,”
who wax enthusiastic over the Good, the True, and the Beautiful, and let
all sorts of colorful, clumsy, and good-natured desiderata swim through
their pond in utter confusion. Happiness and virtue are not arguments.
But we like to forget (even thoughtful spirits like to forget) that being made
unhappy and evil are not counter-arguments either. Something could be
true even if it is harmful and dangerous to the highest degree. It could
even be part of the fundamental character of existence that people with
complete knowledge get destroyed, – so that the strength of a spirit would
be proportionate to how much of the “truth” he could withstand – or, to
put it more clearly, to what extent he needs it to be thinned out, veiled
over, sweetened up, dumbed down, and lied about. But there is no doubt
that when it comes to discovering certain aspects of the truth, people who
are evil and unhappy are more fortunate and have a greater probability
of success (not to mention those who are both evil and happy – a species
that the moralists don’t discuss). Perhaps harshness and cunning provide
more favorable conditions for the origin of the strong, independent spirit
and philosopher than that gentle, ﬁne, yielding good nature and art of
taking things lightly that people value, and value rightly, in a scholar.
Assuming ﬁrst of all that we do not limit our notion of the “philosopher”
to the philosophers who write books – or put their own philosophy into
books! – One last feature for the picture of the free-spirited philosopher


Beyond Good and Evil
is provided by Stendhal; and for the sake of the German taste, I will not
overlook the chance to underscore this character – since it goes against the
German taste. “Pour être bon philosophe,” says this last, great psychologist,
“il faut être sec, clair, sans illusion. Un banquier, qui a fait fortune, a une partie
du caractère requis pour faire des découvertes en philosophie, c’est-à-dire pour
voir clair dans ce qui est.”


Everything profound loves masks; the most profound things go so far as to
hate images and likenesses. Wouldn’t just the opposite be a proper disguise
for the shame of a god? A questionable question: it would be odd if some
mystic hadn’t already risked something similar himself. There are events
that are so delicate that it is best to cover them up with some coarseness
and make them unrecognizable. There are acts of love and extravagant
generosity in whose aftermath nothing is more advisable than to take a
stick and give the eye-witnesses a good beating: this will obscure any
memory traces. Many people are excellent at obscuring and abusing their
own memory, so they can take revenge on at least this one accessory: –
shame is highly resourceful. It is not the worst things that we are the most
ashamed of. Malicious cunning is not the only thing behind a mask –
there is so much goodness in cunning. I could imagine that a man with
something precious and vulnerable to hide would roll through life, rough
and round like an old, green, heavy-hooped wine cask; the subtlety of his
shame will want it this way. A man with something profound in his shame
encounters even his fate and delicate decisions along paths that few people
have ever found, paths whose existence must be concealed from his closest
and most trusted friends. His mortal danger is hidden from their eyes,
and so is his regained sense of conﬁdence in life. Somebody hidden in this
way – who instinctively needs speech in order to be silent and concealed,
and is tireless in evading communication – wants and encourages a mask
of himself to wander around, in his place, through the hearts and heads of
his friends. And even if this is not what he wants, he will eventually realize
that a mask of him has been there all the same, – and that this is for the best.


“To be a good philosopher you have to be dry, clear, and without illusions. A banker who has made
a fortune has to a certain degree the right sort of character for making philosophical discoveries,
i.e. for seeing clearly into what is.” From Stendhal’s Correspondance inédite (Unedited Correspondence) ().



The free spirit
Every profound spirit needs a mask: what’s more, a mask is constantly
growing around every profound spirit, thanks to the consistently false
(which is to say shallow) interpretation of every word, every step, every
sign of life he displays. –


We have to test ourselves to see whether we are destined for independence
and command, and we have to do it at the right time. We should not
sidestep our tests, even though they may well be the most dangerous
game we can play, and, in the last analysis, can be witnessed by no judge
other than ourselves. Not to be stuck to any person, not even somebody
we love best – every person is a prison and a corner. Not to be stuck in
any homeland, even the neediest and most oppressed – it is not as hard
to tear your heart away from a victorious homeland. Not to be stuck in
some pity: even for higher men, whose rare torture and helplessness we
ourselves have accidentally glimpsed. Not to be stuck in some ﬁeld of
study: however much it tempts us with priceless discoveries, reserved, it
seems, for us alone. Not to be stuck in our own detachment, in the ecstasy
of those foreign vistas where birds keep ﬂying higher so that they can keep
seeing more below them: – the danger of those who ﬂy. Not to be stuck to
our own virtues and let our whole self be sacriﬁced for some one of our
details, our “hospitality,” for instance: this is the danger of dangers for
rich souls of a higher type, who spend themselves extravagantly, almost
indifferently, pushing the virtue of liberality to the point of vice. We must
know to conserve ourselves: the greatest test of independence.


A new breed of philosophers is approaching. I will risk christening them
with a name not lacking in dangers. From what I can guess about them,
from what they allow to be guessed (since it is typical of them to want to
remain riddles in some respect), these philosophers of the future might
have the right (and perhaps also the wrong) to be described as those who
attempt. Ultimately, this name is itself only an attempt, and, if you will,
a temptation.


In German: Versucher. Nietzsche frequently uses the terms Versuch (attempt or experiment) and
Versuchung (temptation), and plays on their similarity.



Beyond Good and Evil


Are they new friends of “truth,” these upcoming philosophers? Probably,
since all philosophers so far have loved their truths. But they certainly
will not be dogmatists. It would offend their pride, as well as their taste, if
their truth were a truth for everyone (which has been the secret wish and
hidden meaning of all dogmatic aspirations so far). “My judgment is my
judgment: other people don’t have an obvious right to it too” – perhaps
this is what such a philosopher of the future will say. We must do away with
the bad taste of wanting to be in agreement with the majority. “Good”
is no longer good when it comes from your neighbor’s mouth. And how
could there ever be a “common good”! The term is self-contradictory:
whatever can be common will never have much value. In the end, it has to
be as it is and has always been: great things are left for the great, abysses
for the profound, delicacy and trembling for the subtle, and, all in all,
everything rare for those who are rare themselves. –


After all this, do I really need to add that they will be free, very free
spirits, these philosophers of the future – and that they certainly will not
just be free spirits, but rather something more, higher, greater, and fundamentally different, something that does not want to be misunderstood
or mistaken for anything else? But, in saying this, I feel – towards them
almost as much as towards ourselves (who are their heralds and precursors,
we free spirits!) – an obligation to sweep away a stupid old prejudice
and misunderstanding about all of us that has hung like a fog around
the concept of the “free spirit” for far too long, leaving it completely
opaque. In all the countries of Europe, and in America as well, there is
now something that abuses this name: a very narrow, restricted, chainedup type of spirit whose inclinations are pretty much the opposite of our
own intentions and instincts (not to mention the fact that this restricted
type will be a fully shut window and bolted door with respect to these
approaching new philosophers). In a word (but a bad one): they belong to
the levelers, these misnamed “free spirits” – as eloquent and proliﬁcally
scribbling slaves of the democratic taste and its “modern ideas.” They
are all people without solitude, without their own solitude, clumsy, solid
folks whose courage and honest decency cannot be denied – it’s just that
they are un-free and ridiculously superﬁcial, particularly given their basic


The free spirit
tendency to think that all human misery and wrongdoing is caused by
traditional social structures: which lands truth happily on its head! What
they want to strive for with all their might is the universal, green pasture
happiness of the herd, with security, safety, contentment, and an easier life
for all. Their two most well-sung songs and doctrines are called: “equal
rights” and “sympathy for all that suffers” – and they view suffering itself
as something that needs to be abolished. We, who are quite the reverse,
have kept an eye and a conscience open to the question of where and how
the plant “man” has grown the strongest, and we think that this has always
happened under conditions that are quite the reverse. We think that the
danger of the human condition has ﬁrst had to grow to terrible heights,
its power to invent and dissimulate (its “spirit” –) has had to develop
under prolonged pressure and compulsion into something reﬁned and
daring, its life-will has had to be intensiﬁed to an unconditional powerwill. We think that harshness, violence, slavery, danger in the streets and
in the heart, concealment, Stoicism, the art of experiment, and devilry
of every sort; that everything evil, terrible, tyrannical, predatory, and
snakelike in humanity serves just as well as its opposite to enhance the
species “humanity.” But to say this much is to not say enough, and,
in any event, this is the point we have reached with our speaking and
our silence, at the other end of all modern ideology and herd desires:
perhaps as their antipodes? Is it any wonder that we “free spirits” are
not exactly the most communicative spirits? That we do not want to fully
reveal what a spirit might free himself from and what he will then perhaps
be driven towards? And as to the dangerous formula “beyond good and
evil,” it serves to protect us, at least from being mistaken for something
else. We are something different from “libres-penseurs,” “liberi pensatori,”
“Freidenker” and whatever else all these sturdy advocates of “modern
ideas” like to call themselves. At home in many countries of the spirit,
at least as guests; repeatedly slipping away from the musty, comfortable
corners where preference and prejudice, youth, origin, accidents of people
and books, and even the fatigue of traveling seem to have driven us; full
of malice at the lures of dependency that lie hidden in honors, or money,
or duties, or enthusiasms of the senses; grateful even for difﬁculties and
inconstant health, because they have always freed us from some rule and


In German: Versucherkunst (see note  above).



These are terms meaning “free thinker” in French, Italian, and German.



Beyond Good and Evil
its “prejudice,” grateful to the god, devil, sheep, and maggot in us, curious
to a fault, researchers to the point of cruelty, with unmindful ﬁngers for
the incomprehensible, with teeth and stomachs for the indigestible, ready
for any trade that requires a quick wit and sharp senses, ready for any risk,
thanks to an excess of “free will,” with front and back souls whose ultimate
aim is clear to nobody, with fore- and backgrounds that no foot can fully
traverse, hidden under the cloak of light, conquerors, even if we look like
heirs and prodigals, collectors and gatherers from morning until evening,
miserly with our riches and our cabinets ﬁlled to the brim, economical
with what we learn and forget, inventive in schemata, sometimes proud
of tables of categories, sometimes pedants, sometimes night owls at work,
even in bright daylight; yes, even scarecrows when the need arises – and
today the need has arisen: inasmuch as we are born, sworn, jealous friends
of solitude, our own deepest, most midnightly, noon-likely solitude. This
is the type of people we are, we free spirits! and perhaps you are something
of this yourselves, you who are approaching? you new philosophers? –



Part  The religious character

The human soul and its limits, the scope of human inner experience to
date, the heights, depths, and range of these experiences, the entire history
of the soul so far and its still unexhausted possibilities: these are the
predestined hunting grounds for a born psychologist and lover of the
“great hunt.” But how often does he have to turn to himself in despair
and say: “Only one! only a single one! and this huge forest, this primeval
forest!” And then he wishes he had a few hundred hunting aides and welltrained bloodhounds he could drive into the history of the human soul to
round up his game. To no avail: time and again he gets an ample and bitter
reminder of how hard it is to ﬁnd hounds and helpers for the very things
that prick his curiosity. The problem with sending scholars into new and
dangerous hunting grounds, where courage, intelligence, and subtlety in
every sense are needed, is that they stop being useful the very moment the
“great hunt” (but also the great danger) begins: – this is just when they lose
their sharp eye and keen nose. For instance, it might take somebody who
is himself as deep, as wounded, and as monstrous as Pascal’s intellectual
conscience to ﬁgure out the sort of history that the problem of science
and conscience has had in the soul of homines religiosi so far. And, even
then, such a person would still need that vaulting sky of bright, malicious
spirituality from whose heights this throng of dangerous and painful
experiences could be surveyed, ordered, and forced into formulas. – But
who would do me this service! But who would have the time to wait
for such servants! – it is clear that they grow too rarely; they are so


Religious people.



Beyond Good and Evil
unlikely in every age! In the end, you have to do everything yourself if
you want to know anything: which means you have a lot to do! – But
a curiosity like mine is still the most pleasant vice of all; – oh sorry! I
meant to say: the love of truth ﬁnds its reward in heaven and even on
earth. –


The sort of faith demanded (and often achieved) by early Christianity
in the middle of a skeptical, southern, free-spirited world, a world that
had century-long struggles between schools of philosophy behind and
inside it, not to mention the education in tolerance given by the imperium
Romanum – this faith is not the simple, rude, peon’s faith with which a
Luther or a Cromwell or some other northern barbarian of the spirit clung
to its God and its Christianity. It is much closer to Pascal’s faith, which has
the gruesome appearance of a protracted suicide of reason – a tough, longlived, worm-like reason that cannot be killed all at once and with a single
stroke. From the beginning, Christian faith has been sacriﬁce: sacriﬁce of
all freedom, of all pride, of all self-conﬁdence of the spirit; it is simultaneously enslavement and self-derision, self-mutilation. There is cruelty and
religious Phoenicianism in this faith, which is expected of a worn-down,
many-sided, badly spoiled conscience. Its presupposition is that the subjugation of spirit causes indescribable pain, and that the entire past and all the
habits of such a spirit resist the absurdissimum presented to it as “faith.”
Obtuse to all Christian terminology, modern people can no longer relate
to the hideous superlative found by an ancient taste in the paradoxical
formula “god on the cross.” Nowhere to date has there been such a bold
inversion or anything quite as horrible, questioning, and questionable as
this formula. It promised a revaluation of all the values of antiquity. –
This was the revenge of the Orient, the deep Orient, this was the revenge
of the oriental slave on Rome with its noble and frivolous tolerance, on
Roman “Catholicity” of faith. And what infuriated the slaves about and
against their masters was never faith itself, but rather the freedom from
faith, that half-stoic and smiling nonchalance when it came to the seriousness of faith. Enlightenment is infuriating. Slaves want the unconditional;


Roman Empire.



Height of absurdity.



The religious character
they understand only tyranny, even in morality. They love as they hate,
without nuance, into the depths, to the point of pain and sickness – their
copious, hidden suffering makes them furious at the noble taste that seems
to deny suffering. Skepticism about suffering (which is basically just an
affectation of aristocratic morality) played no small role in the genesis of
the last great slave revolt, which began with the French Revolution.


Wherever the religious neurosis has appeared so far, we ﬁnd it connected
with three dangerous dietary prescriptions: solitude, fasting, and sexual
abstinence, – but without being able to say for sure which is the cause and
which is the effect and whether in fact there is a causal relation at all. This
last doubt seems justiﬁed by the fact that another one of the most regular
symptoms of the religious neurosis, in both wild and tame peoples, is the
most sudden and dissipated display of voluptuousness, which then turns
just as suddenly into spasms of repentance and negations of the world
and will: perhaps both can be interpreted as epilepsy in disguise? But
here is where interpretation must be resisted the most: no type to date
has been surrounded by such an overgrowth of inanity and superstition;
and none so far has seemed to hold more interest for people, or even for
philosophers. It might be time to calm down a bit, as far as this topic goes,
to learn some caution, or even better: to look away, to go away. – This
gruesome question-mark of religious crisis and awakening still stands
in the background of the newest arrival in philosophy (which is to say:
the Schopenhauerian philosophy), almost as the problem in itself. How is
negation of the will possible? How is the saint possible? This really seems to
have been the question that started Schopenhauer off and made him into
a philosopher. And so it was a true Schopenhauerian consequence that his
most devoted follower (and perhaps also his last, as far as Germany was
concerned –), namely Richard Wagner, ﬁnished his own life’s work at this
very point, and ﬁnally brought to the stage the life and times of that awful
and eternal type in the character of Kundry, type vécu. And, at the same
time, psychiatrists in almost every European country had the opportunity
to study this type up close, wherever the religious neurosis – or, as I call
it, “the religious character” – was having its latest epidemic outbreak and


A type that has lived. Kundry is a character from Wagner’s last opera, Parsifal.



Beyond Good and Evil
pageant as the “Salvation Army.” – But if someone asks what it really was
in the whole phenomenon of the saint that caused such inordinate interest
among people of all kinds in all ages, and even among philosophers, it
was undoubtedly the aura of a miracle that clung to it; it displayed the
immediate succession of opposites, of antithetically valorized moral states
of soul. It seemed palpable that here was a “bad man” turning suddenly
into a good man, a “saint.” Psychology to date has been shipwrecked
on this spot. Wasn’t this primarily because it had put itself under the
dominance of morality, because it actually believed in opposing moral
values, and saw, read, and interpreted these opposites into texts and into
facts? – What? So “miracles” are just errors of interpretation? A lack of
philology? –


The Latin races seem to have much more of an afﬁnity to their Catholicism than we northerners do to Christianity in general. Consequently,
a lack of belief means something very different in Catholic countries
than in Protestant ones. In Catholic countries it is a sort of anger against
the spirit of the race, while with us it is more like a return to the spirit
(or un-spirit –) of the race. There is no doubt that we northerners are
descended from barbarian races, even as far as our talent for religion
goes – it is a meager talent. The Celts are an exception, which is why they
also furnished the best soil for the spread of the Christian infection to the
north: – the Christian ideal came into bloom in France, at least as far as the
pale northern sun would allow. Even these recent French skeptics, how
strangely pious they strike our tastes, to the extent that there is some Celtic
blood in their lineage! How Catholic, how un-German Auguste Comte’s
sociology smells to us, with its Roman logic of the instincts! How Jesuitical Sainte-Beuve is, that amiable and intelligent cicerone of Port-Royal,
in spite of all his hostility towards the Jesuits! And especially Ernest Renan:
how inaccessible the language of such as Renan sounds to us northerners, this man with a soul that is voluptuous (in a more reﬁned sense) and
inclined to rest quite comfortably, but is always being thrown off balance
by some nothingness of religious tension! Let us repeat these beautiful
sentences after him, – along with the sort of malice and arrogance that
stirs in our souls in immediate reply, souls that are probably harsher and
not nearly as beautiful, being German souls! – “disons donc hardiment que


The religious character
la religion est un produit de l’homme normal, que l’homme est le plus dans le
vrai quand il est le plus religieux et le plus assuré d’une destinée inﬁnie . . . C’est
quand il est bon qu’il veut que la vertu corresponde à un ordre éternel, c’est
quand il contemple les choses d’une manière désintéressée qu’il trouve la mort
révoltante et absurde. Comment ne pas supposer que c’est dans ces moments-là,
que l’homme voit le mieux? . . .” These sentences are so utterly antipodal
to my ears and habits that when I found them, my initial rage wrote “la
niaiserie religieuse par excellence!” next to them – until my ﬁnal rage actually started to like them, these sentences whose truth is standing on its
head! It is so elegant, so distinguished, to have your own antipodes!


What is amazing about the religiosity of ancient Greeks is the excessive
amount of gratitude that ﬂows out from it: – it takes a very noble type of
person to face nature and life like this! – Later, when the rabble gained
prominence in Greece, religion became overgrown with fear as well, and
Christianity was on the horizon. –


The passion for God: there is the peasant type, naive and presumptuous – like Luther. The whole of Protestantism is devoid of any southern
delicatezza. It has a certain oriental ecstasy, as when an undeserving slave
has been pardoned or promoted – in Augustine, for example, who is offensively lacking any nobility of demeanor and desire. It has a certain
womanly tenderness and lustfulness that pushes coyly and unsuspectingly towards a unio mystica et physica: like Madame de Guyon. It often
appears, strangely enough, as a disguise for the puberty of some girl or
boy; now and then it even appears as the hysteria of an old maid, and her


“So we strongly afﬁrm that religion is a product of the normal man, that man is most in the right
when he is most religious and most assured of an inﬁnite destiny . . . It is when he is good that he
wants virtue to correspond to an eternal order, it is when he contemplates things in a disinterested
manner that he ﬁnds death revolting and absurd. How could we fail to suppose that these are the
moments when man sees best?”



Religious silliness par excellence.



Delicacy.



Mystical and physical union.



Beyond Good and Evil
ﬁnal ambition: – in such cases, the church often declares the woman to
be a saint.


To this day, the most powerful people have still bowed down in veneration before the saint, as the riddle of self-conquest and deliberate, ﬁnal
renunciation: why have they bowed down like this? They sensed a superior force in the saint and, as it were, behind the question-mark of his
frail and pathetic appearance, a force that wants to test itself through
this sort of conquest. They sensed a strength of will in which they
could recognize and honor their own strength and pleasure in domination. When they honored the saint, they honored something in themselves. Furthermore, the sight of the saint made them suspicious: “No
one would desire such a monstrosity of negation, of anti-nature, for
nothing,” they said to (and asked of) themselves. “Perhaps there is a
reason for it, perhaps the ascetic has inside information about some very
great danger, thanks to his secret counselors and visitors?” Enough: in
front of the saint, the powerful of the world learned a new fear, they
sensed a new power, an alien, still unconquered enemy: – it was the
“will to power” that made them stop in front of the saint. They had to ask
him – –


The Jewish “Old Testament,” the book of divine justice, has people,
things, and speeches in such grand style that it is without parallel in the
written works of Greece and India. We stand in horror and awe before
this monstrous vestige of what humanity once was, and then reﬂect sadly
on old Asia and its protruding little peninsula of Europe that desperately
wants (over and against Asia) to stand for the “progress of humanity.” Of
course: there will be nothing in these ruins to astonish or distress anyone
who is just a dull, tame, house pet himself, and understands only house pet
needs (like educated people today, including the Christians of “educated”
Christianity) – the taste for the Old Testament is a touchstone for the
“great” and the “small.” Perhaps he will still ﬁnd the New Testament,
the book of mercy, more to his liking (it is full of the proper, tender,
musty stench of true believers and small souls). The fact that this New


The religious character
Testament (which is a type of Rococo of taste in every respect) gets pasted
together with the Old Testament to make a single book, a “Bible,” a “book
in itself ”: this is probably the greatest piece of temerity and “sin against
the spirit” that literary Europe has on its conscience.


Why atheism today? God “the Father” has been thoroughly refuted;
and so has “the Judge” and “the Reward-giver.” The same for God’s
“free will”: he doesn’t listen, – and even if he did, he wouldn’t know how
to help anyway. The worst part of it is: he seems unable to communicate
in an intelligible manner: is he unclear? – After hearing, questioning, discussing many things, these are the causes I have found for the decline of
European theism. It seems to me that the religious instinct is indeed growing vigorously – but that it rejects any speciﬁcally theistic gratiﬁcation
with profound distrust.


So what is really going on with the whole of modern philosophy? Since
Descartes (and, in fact, in spite of him more than because of him) all
the philosophers have been out to assassinate the old concept of the soul,
under the guise of critiquing the concepts of subject and predicate. In other
words, they have been out to assassinate the fundamental presupposition
of the Christian doctrine. As a sort of epistemological skepticism, modern
philosophy is, covertly or overtly, anti-Christian (although, to state the
point for more subtle ears, by no means anti-religious). People used to
believe in “the soul” as they believed in grammar and the grammatical
subject: people said that “I” was a condition and “think” was a predicate
and conditioned – thinking is an activity, and a subject must be thought
of as its cause. Now, with admirable tenacity and cunning, people are
wondering whether they can get out of this net – wondering whether the
reverse might be true: that “think” is the condition and “I” is conditioned,
in which case “I” would be a synthesis that only gets produced through
thought itself. Kant essentially wanted to prove that the subject cannot
be proven on the basis of the subject – and neither can the object. The
possibility that the subject (and therefore “the soul”) has a merely apparent
existence might not always have been foreign to him, this thought that,


Beyond Good and Evil
in the form of the Vedanta philosophy, has already arisen on earth once
before and with enormous power.


There is a great ladder of religious cruelty, and, of its many rungs, three
are the most important. People used to make human sacriﬁces to their
god, perhaps even sacriﬁcing those they loved the best – this sort of phenomenon can be found in the sacriﬁce of the ﬁrstborn (a practice shared
by all prehistoric religions), as well as in Emperor Tiberius’ sacriﬁce in
the Mithras grotto on the Isle of Capri, that most gruesome of all Roman
anachronisms. Then, during the moral epoch of humanity, people sacriﬁced the strongest instincts they had, their “nature,” to their god; the joy
of this particular festival shines in the cruel eyes of the ascetic, that enthusiastic piece of “anti-nature.” Finally: what was left to be sacriﬁced? In the
end, didn’t people have to sacriﬁce all comfort and hope, everything holy
or healing, any faith in a hidden harmony or a future ﬁlled with justice
and bliss? Didn’t people have to sacriﬁce God himself and worship rocks,
stupidity, gravity, fate, or nothingness out of sheer cruelty to themselves?
To sacriﬁce God for nothingness – that paradoxical mystery of the ﬁnal
cruelty has been reserved for the race that is now approaching: by now
we all know something about this. –


Anyone like me, who has tried for a long time and with some enigmatic
desire, to think pessimism through to its depths and to deliver it from
the half-Christian, half-German narrowness and naiveté with which it
has ﬁnally presented itself to this century, namely in the form of the
Schopenhauerian philosophy; anyone who has ever really looked with an
Asiatic and supra-Asiatic eye into and down at the most world-negating
of all possible ways of thinking – beyond good and evil, and no longer, like
Schopenhauer and the Buddha, under the spell and delusion of morality –;
anyone who has done these things (and perhaps precisely by doing these
things) will have inadvertently opened his eyes to the inverse ideal: to the
ideal of the most high-spirited, vital, world-afﬁrming individual, who has
learned not just to accept and go along with what was and what is, but who
wants it again just as it was and is through all eternity, insatiably shouting


The religious character
da capo not just to himself but to the whole play and performance, and
not just to a performance, but rather, fundamentally, to the one who needs
precisely this performance – and makes it necessary: because again and
again he needs himself – and makes himself necessary. – – What? and
that wouldn’t be – circulus vitiosus deus?


As humanity’s spiritual vision and insight grows stronger, the distance
and, as it were, the space that surrounds us increases as well; our world
gets more profound, and new stars, new riddles and images are constantly
coming into view. Perhaps everything the mind’s eye has used to quicken
its wit and deepen its understanding was really just a chance to practice,
a piece of fun, something for children and childish people. Perhaps the
day will come when the concepts of “God” and “sin,” which are the most
solemn concepts of all and have caused the most ﬁghting and suffering,
will seem no more important to us than a child’s toy and a child’s pain
seem to an old man, – and perhaps “the old man” will then need another
toy and another pain, – still enough of a child, an eternal child!


Has anyone really noticed the extent to which being outwardly idle or
half-idle is necessary for a genuinely religious life (and for its favorite job
of microscopic self-examination just as much as for that tender state of
composure which calls itself “prayer” and is a constant readiness for the
“coming of God”)? – I mean an idleness with a good conscience, passed
down over the ages, through the bloodline, an idleness that is not entirely
alien to the aristocratic feeling that work is disgraceful, which is to say it
makes the soul and the body into something base. And has anyone noticed
that, consequently, it is the modern, noisy, time-consuming, self-satisﬁed,
stupidly proud industriousness which, more than anything else, gives
people an education and preparation in “un-belief ”? For example, among
those in Germany today who have distanced themselves from religion,



From the beginning. In musical scores, this directs the performer to return to an earlier point in
the piece and repeat what has already been played.
God as a vicious circle.



Beyond Good and Evil
I ﬁnd representatives of various types and extractions of “free-thinking”;
but, above all, a majority whose industriousness has, over generations,
dissolved any religious instinct, so that they no longer know what religion
is good for, and only register its presence in the world with a type of dull
amazement. They feel they are already busy enough, these good people,
whether it is with their businesses or their pleasures, not to mention the
“fatherland” and the newspapers and “familial obligations.” They do not
seem to have any time to spare for religion, particularly when it is unclear
to them whether it would be a new business or a new pleasure – “since
people can’t possibly be going to church just to spoil a good mood,” they
tell themselves. They are not enemies of religious customs; if circumstance
(or the state) requires them to take part in such customs, they do what
is required, like people tend to do –, and they do it with a patient and
unassuming earnestness, without much in the way of curiosity or unease:
they just live too far apart and outside to even think they need a For or
Against in such matters. Today, most middle-class German Protestants
are also among the ranks of the indifferent, particularly in the industrious
large trade and transportation centers; the same is true for the majority of
industrious scholars, and the whole university apparatus (except for the
theologians, whose presence and possibility here gives the psychologist
increasingly many and increasingly subtle riddles to resolve). People who
are devout or even just church-goers will rarely imagine how much goodwill
(or may be “whimsical will”) is required for a German scholar to take the
problem of religion seriously. On the basis of his whole craft (and, as
mentioned before, on the basis of the craftsman-like industriousness his
modern conscience commits him to), he tends to regard religion with an air
of superior, almost gracious amusement, which is sometimes mixed with a
slight contempt for what he assumes to be an “uncleanliness” of spirit that
exists wherever anyone still supports the church. Only with the help of
history (and therefore not on the basis of his personal experience) does the
scholar succeed in approaching religion with a reverential seriousness and
a certain cautious consideration. But even if he reaches the point where
he feels grateful for religion, he does not come a single step closer to what
still passes for church or piety: possibly even the reverse. The practical
indifference towards religious matters with which he was born and raised
tends, in his case, to be sublimated into a caution and cleanliness that shuns
contact with religious people and religious affairs; and it can be the very
depth of his tolerance and humanity that urges him to evade the subtle


The religious character
crises intrinsic to toleration itself. – Every age has its own, divine type
of naiveté that other ages may envy; and how much naiveté – admirable,
childish, boundlessly foolish naiveté – lies in the scholar’s belief in his
own superiority, in the good conscience he has of his tolerance, in the
clueless, simple certainty with which he instinctively treats the religious
man as an inferior, lesser type, something that he himself has grown out
of, away from, and above, – he, who is himself a presumptuous little dwarf
and rabble-man, a brisk and busy brain- and handiworker of “ideas,” of
“modern ideas”!


Anyone who has looked deeply into the world will probably guess the
wisdom that lies in human superﬁciality. An instinct of preservation has
taught people to be ﬂighty, light, and false. We occasionally ﬁnd both
philosophers and artists engaging in a passionate and exaggerated worship
of “pure forms.” Let there be no doubt that anyone who needs the cult
of the surface this badly has at some point reached beneath the surface
with disastrous results. Perhaps there is even an order of rank for these
wounded children, the born artists, who ﬁnd pleasure in life only by
intending to falsify its image, in a sort of prolonged revenge against life –.
We can infer the degree to which life has been spoiled for them from
the extent to which they want to see its image distorted, diluted, deiﬁed,
and cast into the beyond – considered as artists, the homines religiosi
would belong to the highest rank. Entire millennia sink their teeth into a
religious interpretation of existence, driven by a deep, suspicious fear of
an incurable pessimism; this fear comes from an instinct which senses that
we could get hold of the truth too soon, before people have become strong
enough, hard enough, artistic enough . . . Seen in this light, piety – the
“life in God” – appears as the last and most subtle monstrosity produced
by fear of the truth; it appears as the artists’ worship and intoxication
before the most consistent of all falsiﬁcations, as the will to invert the
truth, the will to untruth at any price. Perhaps piety has been the most
potent method yet for the beautiﬁcation of humanity: it can turn people
into art, surface, plays of colors, benevolence, and to such an extent that
we can ﬁnally look at them without suffering. –


Religious people.



Beyond Good and Evil


To love humanity for the sake of God – that has been the noblest and most
bizarre feeling people have attained so far. That the love of humanity, in
the absence of any sanctifying ulterior motive, is one more stupidity and
abomination; that the tendency to love humanity like this can only get
its standard, its subtlety, its grain of salt and pinch of ambergris from a
higher tendency: – whoever it was that ﬁrst felt and “experienced” all
this, however much his tongue might have stumbled as it tried to express
such a tenderness, let him be forever holy and admirable to us as the man
who has ﬂown the highest so far and has got the most beautifully lost!


The philosopher as we understand him, we free spirits –, as the man
with the most comprehensive responsibility, whose conscience bears the
weight of the overall development of humanity, this philosopher will make
use of religion for his breeding and education work, just as he will make use
of the prevailing political and economic situation. The inﬂuence that can
be exerted over selection and breeding with the help of religions (and this
inﬂuence is always just as destructive as it is creative and formative) varies
according to the type of person who falls under their spell and protection. For people who are strong, independent, prepared, and predestined
for command, people who come to embody the reason and art of a governing race, religion is an additional means of overcoming resistances,
of being able to rule. It binds the ruler together with the ruled, giving
and handing the consciences of the ruled over to the rulers – which is to
say: handing over their hidden and most interior aspect, and one which
would very much like to escape obedience. And if individuals from such
a noble lineage are inclined, by their high spirituality, towards a retiring
and contemplative life, reserving for themselves only the ﬁnest sorts of
rule (over exceptional young men or monks), then religion can even be
used as a means of securing calm in the face of the turmoil and tribulations of the cruder forms of government, and purity in the face of the
necessary dirt of politics. This is how the Brahmins, for instance, understood the matter. With the help of a religious organization, they assumed the power to appoint kings for the people, while they themselves
kept and felt removed and outside, a people of higher, over-kingly tasks.


The religious character
Meanwhile, religion also gives some fraction of the ruled the instruction
and opportunity they need to prepare for eventual rule and command.
This is particularly true for that slowly ascending class and station in
which, through fortunate marriage practices, the strength and joy of the
will, the will to self-control is always on the rise. Religion tempts and urges
them to take the path to higher spirituality and try out feelings of great
self-overcoming, of silence, and of solitude. Asceticism and Puritanism
are almost indispensable means of educating and ennobling a race that
wants to gain control over its origins among the rabble, and work its way
up to eventual rule. Finally, as for the common people, the great majority,
who exist and are only allowed to exist to serve and to be of general
utility, religion gives them an invaluable sense of contentment with their
situation and type; it puts their hearts greatly at ease, it gloriﬁes their
obedience, it gives them (and those like them) one more happiness and one
more sorrow, it transﬁgures and improves them, it provides something
of a justiﬁcation for everything commonplace, for all the lowliness, for
the whole half-bestial poverty of their souls. Religion, and the meaning
religion gives to life, spreads sunshine over such eternally tormented
people and makes them bearable even to themselves. It has the same
effect that an Epicurean philosophy usually has on the suffering of higher
ranks: it refreshes, reﬁnes, and makes the most of suffering, as it were.
In the end it even sanctiﬁes and justiﬁes. Perhaps there is nothing more
venerable about Christianity and Buddhism than their art of teaching
even the lowliest to use piety in order to situate themselves in an illusory
higher order of things, and in so doing stay satisﬁed with the actual order,
in which their lives are hard enough (in which precisely this hardness is
necessary!).


Finally, to show the downside of these religions as well and throw light
on their uncanny dangers: there is a high and horrible price to pay when
religions do not serve as means for breeding and education in the hands of
a philosopher, but instead serve themselves and become sovereign, when
they want to be the ultimate goal instead of a means alongside other means.
With humans as with every other type of animal, there is a surplus of failures and degenerates, of the diseased and inﬁrm, of those who necessarily
suffer. Even with humans, successful cases are always the exception and,


Beyond Good and Evil
since humans are the still undetermined animals, the infrequent exception.
But it gets worse: people who represent more nobly bred types are less
likely to turn out well. Chance, that law of nonsense in the overall economy
of mankind, is most terribly apparent in its destructive effect on the higher
men, whose conditions of life are subtle, multiple, and difﬁcult to calculate. So how is this surplus of failures treated by the two greatest religions,
those mentioned above? They try to preserve, to keep everything living
that can be kept in any way alive. In fact, they take sides with the failures
as a matter of principle, as religions of the suffering. They give rights to
all those who suffer life like a disease, and they want to make every other
feeling for life seem wrong and become impossible. Whatever merit we
might ﬁnd in this indulgent, preserving care, which was and is meant for
the highest types of people (since these are the ones that, historically, have
almost always suffered the most), along with everyone else – nevertheless,
in the ﬁnal analysis, the religions that have existed so far (which have all
been sovereign) have played a principal role in keeping the type “man” on
a lower level. They have preserved too much of what should be destroyed.
They have done invaluable service, these religions, and who is so richly
endowed with gratitude not to grow poor in the face of everything that, for
instance, the “spiritual men” of Christianity have done for Europe so far!
And yet, after they gave comfort to the suffering, courage to the oppressed
and despairing, a staff and support to the dependent, after they found people who were inwardly destroyed or had grown wild and lured them away
from society, into cloisters and spiritual prisons: what else did they have
to do, to work in good conscience and conviction for the preservation
of all the sick and suffering, which really means working in word and
in deed for the deterioration of the European race? Stand all valuations on
their head – that is what they had to do! And crush the strong, strike down
the great hopes, throw suspicion on the delight in beauty, skew everything self-satisﬁed, manly, conquering, domineering, every instinct that
belongs to the highest and best-turned-out type of “human,” twist them
into uncertainty, crisis of conscience, self-destruction; at the limit, invert
the whole love of the earth and of earthly dominion into hatred against
earth and the earthly – that is the task the church set and needed to set
for itself until, in its estimation, “unworldly,” “unsensuous,” and “higher
man” ﬁnally melted together into a single feeling. If you could survey the
strangely painful, crude yet subtle comedy of European Christianity with
the mocking and disinterested eye of an Epicurean god, I think you would


The religious character
ﬁnd it to be a constant source of amazement and laughter. Doesn’t it seem
as if, for eighteen centuries, Europe was dominated by the single will to
turn humanity into a sublime abortion? But if somebody with opposite
needs were to approach the almost willful degeneration and atrophy of
humanity that the Christian European (Pascal for instance) has become,
somebody whose manner is no longer Epicurean, but has instead some
divine hammer in hand; wouldn’t he have to yell out in rage, in pity, in
horror: “Oh you fools, you presumptuous, pitying fools, what have you
done here! Was that work meant for your hands! Look how you’ve wrecked
and ruined my most beautiful stone! Who gave you the right to do such
a thing!” – What I mean is: Christianity has been the most disastrous
form of arrogance so far. People who were not high and hard enough to
give human beings artistic form; people who were not strong or far-sighted
enough, who lacked the sublime self-discipline to give free reign to the
foreground law of ruin and failure by the thousands; people who were not
noble enough to see the abysmally different orders of rank and chasms
in rank between different people. People like this, with their “equality
before God” have prevailed over the fate of Europe so far, until a stunted,
almost ridiculous type, a herd animal, something well-meaning, sickly,
and mediocre has ﬁnally been bred: the European of today . . .



Part 

Epigrams and entr’actes


Genuine teachers only take things seriously where their students are concerned – even themselves.


“Knowledge for its own sake” – this is the ﬁnal snare morality has laid;
with it, we become completely entangled in morals once again.


Knowledge would have little charm if there were not so much shame to
be overcome in order to reach it.

a
People are at their least honest when it comes to their God: he is not
allowed to sin!


The tendency to let oneself be debased, robbed, lied to, and exploited
could be the shame of a god among men.


It is barbaric to love one thing alone, since this one love will be pursued
at the expense of all others. This includes love of God.


Epigrams and entr’actes


“I did that” says my memory. I couldn’t have done that – says my pride,
and stands its ground. Finally, memory gives in.


You have been a poor observer of life if you have not also seen the hand
that, ever so gently – kills.


If you have character, you also have a typical experience that always comes
back.


The sage as astronomer. – If you still experience the stars as something
“over you,” you still don’t have the eyes of a knower.


It is not the strength but the duration of high feelings that makes for high
men.


Precisely by attaining an ideal, we surpass it.

a
Many peacocks hide their peacock tails – and call that their pride.


A man with genius is insufferable if he doesn’t have at least two more
things: gratitude and cleanliness.


Beyond Good and Evil


The degree and type of a person’s sexuality reaches up into the furthermost peaks of their spirit.


In peaceful conditions, the warlike man will attack himself.


People use their principles to try to tyrannize or justify or honor or insult
or conceal their habits: – two people with the same principles will probably
want utterly different things from them.


Anyone who despises himself will still respect himself as a despiser.


A soul that knows it is loved but does not itself love exposes its sediment: –
its bottom-most aspect rises to the top.


An issue that has been resolved stops mattering to us. – What did that
god who counseled “Know yourself !” really mean? Was it perhaps: “Stop
letting anything matter to you! Become objective!” – And Socrates? – And
the “scientiﬁc man”? –


It is terrible to die of thirst in the ocean. So do you have to salt your truth
to the point where it doesn’t quench thirst anymore?


“Pity for all” – would be harshness and tyranny for you, my dear
neighbor! –


Apollo.



Epigrams and entr’actes


Instinct. – When your house is on ﬁre, you even forget about lunch. – Yes,
but you pick it out from the ashes.


Women learn how to hate in the same proportion that they unlearn how
to charm.


The same affects have different tempos in men and in women: that is why
men and women do not stop misunderstanding each other.


Behind all their personal vanity, women always have an impersonal contempt – for “woman.”


Bound heart, free spirit. – If someone binds up his heart and takes it captive,
he can give his spirit considerable freedom: I have said this once already.
But nobody will believe me if they do not already know . . .


You start to mistrust very clever people when they get embarrassed.


Terrible experiences make you wonder if the people who have experienced
them are not terrible themselves.


Love and hate, the very things that weigh other people down, will make
heavy, heavy-hearted people lighter and momentarily superﬁcial.


Beyond Good and Evil


So icy cold you burn your ﬁnger on him! Every hand that touches him
gets a shock! – and that is why many people think he glows.


Who, for the sake of his good name, has never – sacriﬁced himself? –


There is no hatred for mankind in affability which, for that very reason,
contains all too great a contempt for mankind.


Human maturity: this means rediscovering the seriousness we had towards
play when we were children.


To be ashamed of your immorality: that is a step on the stairway that
ultimately leads you to be ashamed of your morality as well.


People should leave life like Odysseus left Nausicaa – with more blessings
than ardor.


What? A great man? I can only see an actor of his own ideal.


When we discipline our conscience, it kisses us while it bites.


Disappointment speaks. – “I listened for an echo and heard only praise – ”


Epigrams and entr’actes


We all pretend to ourselves that we are more naive than we are: this is how
we relax from other people.


Today, someone with knowledge might well feel like God becoming
animal.


When somebody discovers their love is requited, it really should temper
their feelings for their beloved. “What? This person is unassuming enough
to love even you? Or stupid enough? Or – or – ”


Danger in happiness. – “Now everything is at its best, now I love every
fate: – who wants to be my fate?”


It is not their love for humanity but rather the impotence of their love for
humanity that keeps today’s Christian from – burning us.


For free spirits, for the “pious men of knowledge” – the pia fraus offends
taste (offends their “piety”) more than the impia fraus. This explains
their profound failure to understand the church, which is typical of “free
spirits” – as their un-freedom.


Music allows the passions to enjoy themselves.


Pious fraud.



Impious fraud.



Beyond Good and Evil


Whenever you reach a decision, close your ears to even the best objections:
this is the sign of a strong character. Which means: an occasional will to
stupidity.


There are absolutely no moral phenomena, only a moral interpretation of
the phenomena . . .


Often enough the criminal is no match for his deed: he cheapens and
slanders it.


Defenders of criminals are rarely artistic enough to use the beautiful
horror of the deed to the advantage of the doer.


Our vanity is at its strongest precisely when our pride has been wounded.


Whoever feels himself predestined for seeing and not believing will ﬁnd
all believers too noisy and pushy: he will fend them off.


“You want him for yourself ? Stand in front of him looking embarrassed – ”


Any sense of perspective is ruined for women from the very start by enormous expectations about sexual love and by the shame these expectations
bring.


Epigrams and entr’actes


Where neither love nor hate are in play, woman is a mediocre player.


The great epochs of our lives come when we gather the courage to reconceive our evils as what is best in us.


The will to overcome an affect is, in the end, itself only the will of another,
or several other, affects.


There is an innocence in admiration: it is found in people who do not
realize that they themselves might also be admired some day.


Disgust at ﬁlth can be so great that it prevents us from cleaning ourselves –
from “justifying” ourselves.


Sensuality often hurries the growth of love so that the root stays weak and
is easy to tear up.


It is subtle that God learned Greek when he wanted to become a writer –
and that he did not learn it better.


Taking pleasure in praise is, for many, only a courtesy of the heart – which
is quite the reverse of a vanity of the spirit.


Beyond Good and Evil


Even concubinage gets corrupted: – by marriage.


If someone rejoices while burning at the stake it is not because he has
triumphed over his pain, but rather over not feeling any pain when he
expected to. A parable.


When we are forced to change our mind about somebody, we count against
him the trouble he has put us to.


A people is nature’s roundabout way of getting six or seven great men. –
Yes: and then of getting around them.


All proper women ﬁnd something shameful about science. They think it
is too forward, as if it would let people peek under their skin – or worse!
under their dress and ﬁnery.


The more abstract the truth you want to teach, the more you have to
seduce the senses to it.


The devil has the broadest perspective on God, which is why he keeps
so far away from God: – the devil, that is, as the oldest friend of knowledge.


Epigrams and entr’actes


What someone is begins to reveal itself when his talent diminishes – when
he stops showing what he can do. So talent is also a piece of ﬁnery; and
ﬁnery is also a hiding place.


The sexes deceive themselves about each other: which means they basically only love and honor themselves (or their own ideal, to say it more
nicely – ). So men would have it that women are placid – but women
above all are essentially not placid, just like cats, however much they have
rehearsed the appearance of placidity.


We are best punished for our virtues.


Someone who does not know how to ﬁnd the path to his ideal lives more
carelessly and impudently than someone without an ideal.


All credibility, good conscience, and evidence of truth ﬁrst come from the
senses.


Pharisaism is not a degeneration in good people: rather, a good part of it
is the condition of any being good.


The ﬁrst one looks for a midwife for his thoughts – the other, for someone
he can help: this is how a good conversation begins.


Beyond Good and Evil


In dealing with scholars and artists, people are easily led in the wrong
direction: behind a remarkable scholar you will not infrequently ﬁnd a
mediocre person, and behind a mediocre artist quite often – someone
really remarkable.


When we are awake we do the same thing as when we are dreaming: we
ﬁrst invent and create the people we are dealing with – and then forget it
immediately.


In revenge and in love, woman is more barbaric than man.


Advice as riddle. “ – If the bond does not split, – then it ﬁrst must be bit.”


The abdomen is the reason why people are not so quick to consider
themselves gods.


The chastest saying I ever have heard: “Dans le véritable amour c’est l’âme
qui enveloppe le corps.”


Our vanity would have it that the things we do best are the very things
that are most difﬁcult for us. On the origin of many morals.


“In true love, it is the soul that envelops the body.”



Epigrams and entr’actes


When a woman has scholarly inclinations, there is usually something
wrong with her sexuality. Even sterility makes her prone to a certain
masculinity of taste; man is, if you will, “the sterile animal.”


Comparing man and woman overall, you could say: woman would not
have a genius for ﬁnery if she did not have an instinct for the secondary
role.


Whoever ﬁghts with monsters should see to it that he does not become
one himself. And when you stare for a long time into an abyss, the abyss
stares back into you.


From old Florentine novellas: but also – from life: buona femmina e mala
femmina vuol bastone. Sacchetti, Nov. .


To seduce those nearest to you into a good opinion, and then credit the
credibility of this opinion: who can equal women in this piece of art? –


What an age perceives as evil is usually an untimely after-effect of
something that used to be perceived as good – the atavism of an older
ideal.


“Both good and bad women need the stick.” From Franco Sacchetti, Novelle (written in the late
fourteenth century, but published in ).



Beyond Good and Evil


Around the hero everything turns into tragedy; around the demigod
everything turns into a satyr play; and around God everything turns
into – what? Perhaps “world”? –


It is not enough to have a talent: we also need to have your permission for
it, – right? my friends?


“Paradise is wherever the tree of knowledge stands”: that is what the
oldest and youngest serpents say.


Whatever is done out of love takes place beyond good and evil.


Objections, minor inﬁdelities, cheerful mistrust, a delight in mockery –
these are symptoms of health. Everything unconditional belongs to
pathology.


A sense for the tragic grows and declines along with sensuousness.


Madness is rare in the individual – but with groups, parties, peoples, and
ages it is the rule.


The thought of suicide is a strong means of comfort: it helps get us
through many an evil night.


Epigrams and entr’actes


Our strongest drives, the tyrants in us, subjugate not only our reason but
our conscience as well.


We have to repay good and bad: but why do we have to repay precisely
those people who did us the good or bad?


You do not love your knowledge enough anymore, as soon as you communicate it.


Poets are shameless with their experiences: they exploit them.


“Our ‘neighbors’ are not the ones next door to us, but rather the ones
next door to them” – this is what all peoples believe.


Love brings to light the high and the hidden qualities of the lover – what is
rare and exceptional about him: to this extent, love easily misleads about
his ordinary traits.


Jesus said to his Jews: “The law was for servants, – love God as I do, as
his son! Why should we care about morals, we sons of God?” –


In German: Unser Nächster. This means “neighbor” in the Biblical sense, which Nietzsche is
contrasting with Nachbar (the ones next door), a more general term for “neighbor.”



Beyond Good and Evil


Regarding all parties. – A shepherd always needs another bellwether, – or
sometimes he has to be the wether himself.


Lies come through our mouths – but the face that accompanies them tells
the truth.


With hard people, intimacy is a source of shame – and something precious.


Christianity gave Eros poison to drink: – he did not die from it, but
degenerated into a vice.


Talking frequently about yourself can also be a way of hiding.


There is more intrusiveness in praise than in censure.


Pity is almost laughable in a man of knowledge, like tender hands on a
Cyclops.


Every once in a while, a love of humanity will inspire us to embrace
some arbitrary person (because we cannot embrace everyone): but that is
precisely what we cannot let the arbitrary person know . . .


Epigrams and entr’actes


We do not hate what we accord little value, but only what we consider
equal or superior.


You utilitarians, even you love everything utile only as a vehicle for your
inclinations, – and even you really cannot stand the noise of its wheels?


In the end, we love our desires and not the thing desired.


Other people’s vanity offends our taste only when it offends our vanity.


Perhaps nobody has ever been truthful enough about what “truthfulness”
is.


No one believes in the stupidities of clever people: what a loss of human
rights!


The consequences of our acts grab us by the hair, regardless of the fact
that we have “improved” ourselves in the meantime.


There is an innocence in lying that is the sign of good faith in a cause.


Useful.



Beyond Good and Evil


It is inhuman to bless where you are cursed.


The conﬁdences of our superiors enrage us because they cannot be reciprocated. –


“I’m not upset because you lied to me, I’m upset because I don’t believe
you any more.” –


Goodness has a high-spiritedness that looks like malice.


“I dislike him.” – Why? – “I’m no match for him.” – Has anyone ever
given this sort of an answer?



Part  On the natural history of morals

In Europe these days, moral sentiment is just as reﬁned, late, multiple,
sensitive, and subtle as the “science of morals” (which belongs with it)
is young, neophyte, clumsy, and crude: – an attractive contrast, and one
that occasionally becomes visible, embodied in the person of the moralist
himself. Considering what it signiﬁes, the very phrase “science of morals”
is much too arrogant and offends good taste, which always tends to prefer
more modest terms. We should admit to ourselves with all due severity exactly what will be necessary for a long time to come and what is
provisionally correct, namely: collecting material, formulating concepts,
and putting into order the tremendous realm of tender value feelings and
value distinctions that live, grow, reproduce, and are destroyed, – and,
perhaps, attempting to illustrate the recurring and more frequent shapes
of this living crystallization, – all of which would be a preparation for a
typology of morals. Of course, people have not generally been this modest.
Philosophers have all demanded (with ridiculously stubborn seriousness)
something much more exalted, ambitious, and solemn as soon as they
took up morality as a science: they wanted morality to be grounded, –
and every philosopher so far has thought that he has provided a ground
for morality. Morality itself, however, was thought to be “given.” What
a distance between this sort of crass pride and that supposedly modest
little descriptive project, left in rot and ruin, even though the subtlest
hands and senses could hardly be subtle enough for it. Precisely because
moral philosophers had only a crude knowledge of moral facta, selected
arbitrarily and abbreviated at random – for instance, as the morality of


Beyond Good and Evil
their surroundings, their class, their church, their Zeitgeist, their climate
and region, – precisely because they were poorly informed (and not particularly eager to learn more) about peoples, ages, and histories, they
completely missed out on the genuine problems involved in morality,
problems that only emerge from a comparison of many different moralities. As strange as it may sound, the problem of morality itself has been
missing from every “science of morals” so far: there was no suspicion
that anything was really a problem. Viewed properly, the “grounding of
morals” (as philosophers called it, as they demanded it of themselves) was
only an erudite form of good faith in the dominant morality, a new way
of expressing it; as such, it was itself already situated within the terms of
a certain morality. In the last analysis, it even constitutes a type of denial
that these morals can be regarded as a problem. But, in any event, it is the
opposite of an examination, dissection, interrogation, vivisection of precisely this article of faith. For example, let us listen to the almost admirable
innocence with which even Schopenhauer describes his own project, and
then we can draw our conclusions as to how scientiﬁc a “science” could
be when its ultimate masters are still talking like children or old women.
“The principle,” he says (p.  of the Grundprobleme der Moral ), “the
fundamental claim, on whose content all ethicists actually agree: neminem
laede, immo omnes, quantum potes, juva – this is actually the claim that
all moralists attempt to ground . . . the actual foundation of ethics that
people have sought for millennia, just as they have looked for the philosophers’ stone.” – The difﬁculty involved in grounding the claim just cited
might be great indeed – Schopenhauer himself came up famously short
in this regard. And anyone who has ever truly felt how inanely false and
sentimental this claim is in a world whose essence is will to power –,
they might recall that Schopenhauer, pessimism notwithstanding, actually – played the ﬂute . . . every day, after dinner. You can read it in his
biography. And just out of curiosity: a pessimist who negates both God
and world but stops before morality, – who afﬁrms morality and plays
his ﬂute, afﬁrms laede neminem morality: excuse me? is this really – a
pessimist?


Spirit of the age.



“Harm no one, but rather help everyone as much as you can.”



Schopenhauer’s “Preisschrift über die Grundlage der Moral” (Prize Essay on the Basis of Morals),
part two of Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik (The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics) ().
The emphases are Nietzsche’s.



On the natural history of morals


Apart from the value of claims like “there is a categorical imperative in
us,” the question remains: what do claims like this tell us about the people
who make them? There are moralities that are supposed to justify their
creator in the eyes of others, and other moralities that are supposed to calm
him down and allow him to be content with himself; still other moralities
allow him to crucify and humiliate himself. He can use some moralities
to take revenge, others to hide, and still others to transﬁgure himself and
place himself far and away. There are moralities that help their creator to
forget, and others that let him – or something about him – be forgotten.
Many moralists would like to wield power and impose their creative whims
on humanity; many others (perhaps even Kant himself) want to make it
clear through their morality that “the worthy thing about me is that I can
obey – and it should be the same for you as it is for me!” – in short, even
morality is just a sign language of the affects!


Every morality, as opposed to laisser-aller, is a piece of tyranny against
both “nature” and “reason.” But this in itself is no objection; for that,
we would have to issue yet another decree based on some other morality forbidding every sort of tyranny and unreason. What is essential and
invaluable about every morality is that it is a long compulsion. In order
to understand Stoicism or Port-Royal or Puritanism, just remember the
compulsion under which every language so far has developed strength
and freedom: the compulsion of meter, the tyranny of rhyme and rhythm.
Look at how much trouble the poets and the orators of every country
have to go through! (including some of today’s prose writers, who have
an inexorable conscience in their ear) – and all “for the sake of some stupidity,” as utilitarian fools say (and think they are clever for saying it) – or
“in obsequious submission to arbitrary laws,” as anarchists say (and then
imagine themselves “free,” even free-spirited). But the strange fact is
that everything there is, or was, of freedom, subtlety, boldness, dance, or
masterly assurance on earth, whether in thinking itself, or in ruling, or in
speaking and persuading, in artistic just as in ethical practices, has only
developed by virtue of the “tyranny of such arbitrary laws.” And, in all


Letting go.



Beyond Good and Evil
seriousness, it is not at all improbable that this is what is “nature” and
“natural” – and not that laisser-aller! Every artist knows how far removed
this feeling of letting go is from his “most natural” state, the free ordering, placing, disposing and shaping in the moment of “inspiration” – he
knows how strictly and subtly he obeys thousands of laws at this very
moment, laws that defy conceptual formulation precisely because of their
hardness and determinateness (compared with these laws, there is something ﬂoundering, multiple, and ambiguous about even the most solid
concept –). I will say it again: what seems to be essential “in heaven and
on earth” is that there be obedience in one direction for a long time. In
the long term, this always brings and has brought about something that
makes life on earth worth living – for instance: virtue, art, music, dance,
reason, intellect – something that transﬁgures, something reﬁned, fantastic, and divine. The long un-freedom of spirit, the mistrustful constraint
in the communicability of thought, the discipline that thinkers imposed
on themselves, thinking within certain guidelines imposed by the church
or court or Aristotelian presuppositions, the long, spiritual will to interpret every event according to a Christian scheme and to rediscover
and justify the Christian God in every chance event, – all this violence,
arbitrariness, harshness, terror, and anti-reason has shown itself to be
the means through which strength, reckless curiosity, and subtle agility
have been bred into the European spirit. Admittedly, this also entailed
an irreplaceable loss of force and spirit, which have had to be crushed,
stiﬂed, and ruined (since here, just like everywhere else, “nature,” shows
itself in its utterly wasteful and indifferent glory, which is outrageous but
noble). The fact that, for thousands of years, European thinkers have
been thinking only in order to prove something (these days it is the other
way around: we are suspicious of any thinker who “has something to
prove”) – the fact that the results which were supposed to emerge from
their most intense contemplations were in fact already ﬁrmly established
(somewhat like earlier Asian astrology or even the present-day innocuous
Christian-moral interpretation of the most personal events “to the glory
of god” and “to save the soul”): – this tyranny, this arbitrariness, this stern
and grandiose stupidity has trained the spirit. Slavery, in both the crude
and reﬁned senses of the term, seems to be the indispensable means of
disciplining and breeding even the spirit. We can look at every morality
in the following way: whatever “nature” it contains teaches us to hate
the laisser-aller, the all-too-great freedom, and plants in us the need for


On the natural history of morals
limited horizons and the closest tasks. It teaches a narrowing of perspective
and so, in a certain sense, stupidity as a condition for life and growth.
“You should obey someone, anyone, and for a long time: or else you
will deteriorate and lose all respect for yourself ” – this seems to me to
be the moral imperative of nature, which is clearly neither “categorical,”
as the old Kant demanded it to be (hence the “or else” –), nor directed to
the individual (what does nature care about the individual!), but rather to
peoples, races, ages, classes, and above all to the whole “human” animal,
to the human.


The industrious races ﬁnd it extremely difﬁcult to tolerate idleness: it was
a stroke of genius on the part of the English instinct to spend Sundays in
tedium with a te deum so that the English people would unconsciously
lust for their week- and workdays. It is the same type of cleverly invented,
cleverly interpolated period of fasting that you ﬁnd all over the ancient
world (although there, as is often the case with southern peoples, it is not
exactly associated with work –). There need to be many types of fasts;
and wherever powerful drives and habits rule, the law-makers have to be
sure to put in leap days when these drives are chained up and made to
relearn what hunger feels like. Entire generations or epochs, emerging
in the grips of some moral fanaticism or another, seem (from a higher
viewpoint) to be just such interposed periods of compulsion and fasting,
the times when a drive learns to cower and submit, but also to keep itself
clean and sharp. Some philosophical sects can be interpreted in this way
as well (like the Stoa in the midst of a Hellenistic culture whose air had
become heavy and lascivious with the fragrance of aphrodisiacs). – This
also suggests an explanation for the paradox of why it was precisely during
Europe’s Christian period and only under the pressure of Christian value
judgments that the sex drive sublimated itself into love (amour-passion ).


There is something in Plato’s moral philosophy that does not really belong
to him, but is there in spite of him, as it were: namely, the Socratism that


Love as passion.



Beyond Good and Evil
he was really too noble for. “Nobody wants to harm himself, and therefore everything bad happens involuntarily. The bad man brings harm to
himself, and he would not do so if he knew badness was bad. Accordingly,
people are bad only through error; if the error is removed, they will necessarily become – good.” – This type of inference stinks of the rabble, who
see only the disagreeable effects of bad actions and are in fact judging:
“it is stupid to act badly,” while assuming that “good” is identical with
“useful and pleasant.” If you start off with the assumption that this is the
origin of every utilitarian morality and then follow your nose, you will
rarely go wrong. – Plato did everything he could to interpret something
reﬁned and noble into his teacher’s claim: above all, himself –, him, the
most daring of all interpreters, who treated the whole of Socrates just
like someone might treat a popular theme or folksong from the streets,
varying it to the point of inﬁnity and impossibility, into all his own masks
and multitudes. As a joke (and a Homeric one at that), what is the Platonic
Socrates if not:
’ ιϑέν τ ε λάτ ων µέσ σ η τ ε Xίµαια.
π óσ ϑε λάτ ων oπ


The old theological problem of “faith” and “knowledge” – or, to be more
precise, of instinct and reason – and so, the question of whether, with
respect to the value of things, the instincts deserve more authority than
reason (reason wants some ground or “what for?”, some purpose or utility
behind our values and actions) – this is the same old moral problem
that ﬁrst emerged in the person of Socrates and divided opinions long
before Christianity came along. Socrates of course had initially sided with
reason, given the taste of his talent – that of a superior dialectician. And, in
point of fact, didn’t he spend his whole life laughing at the shortcomings
of his clumsy, noble Athenians, who, like all noble people, were men
of instinct and could never really account for why they acted the way
they did? But in the end, silently and secretly, he laughed at himself
as well; with his acute conscience and self-scrutiny, he discovered the
same difﬁculty and shortcoming in himself. “Why free ourselves from
the instincts?” he asked himself; “We should give them their fair dues,


“Plato at the front, Plato at the back, Chimaera in the middle.”



On the natural history of morals
along with reason – we have to follow our instincts but persuade reason
to come to their aid with good motives.” This was the genuine falseness of
that great, secretive ironist; he made his conscience seem satisﬁed with a
type of self-deceit. Basically, he had seen through to the irrationality of
moral judgments. – Plato, who was more innocent in such matters and
lacked Socrates’ plebeian craftiness, wanted to use all his strength (the
greatest strength a philosopher had ever had at his disposal!) to prove to
himself that reason and the instincts converge independently on a single
goal, on the Good, or “God”; and, ever since Plato, all theologians and
philosophers have been on the same track. Which is to say: in matters
of morality, it has been instinct, or (as the Christians say) “faith,” or (as
I say) “the herd” that has had the upper hand so far. Descartes was an
exception, as the father of rationalism (and consequently grandfather of
the Revolution) who granted authority to reason alone. But reason is only
a tool and Descartes was superﬁcial.


Anyone who investigates the history of a particular science will ﬁnd in its
development a clue to understanding the oldest and most secret processes
of all “knowledge and cognition”: there as here, rash hypotheses, ﬁctions,
the dumb good will to “believe,” and a lack of mistrust and patience
develop ﬁrst – our senses learn late and never fully learn to be reﬁned,
trusty, careful organs of knowledge. Given some stimulus, our eyes ﬁnd
it more convenient to reproduce an image that they have often produced
before than to register what is different and new about an impression:
the latter requires more strength, more “morality.” It is awkward and
difﬁcult for the ear to hear something new; we are bad at listening to
unfamiliar music. When we hear another language, we involuntarily try
to form the sounds we hear into words that sound more comfortable
and familiar to us: so, for instance, German people at one point heard
“arcubalista” and made it into the word “Armbrust.” Even our senses greet
everything novel with reluctance and hostility; and affects like fear, love,
and hate, as well as passive affects of laziness, will be dominant during
even the “simplest” processes of sensibility. – Just as little as today’s


Both words mean “crossbow.” The German term Armbrust literally means “arm-breast” and so
mimics the sound but not the sense of the Latin.



Beyond Good and Evil
reader takes in all the individual words (or especially syllables) on a page
(he catches maybe ﬁve out of twenty words and “guesses” what these
ﬁve arbitrary words might possibly mean) – just as little do we see a tree
precisely and completely, with respect to leaves, branches, colors, and
shape. We ﬁnd it so much easier to imagine an approximate tree instead.
Even in the middle of the strangest experiences we do the same thing:
we invent most of the experience and can barely be made not to regard
ourselves as the “inventor” of some process. – What all this amounts to
is: we are, from the bottom up and across the ages, used to lying. Or, to
put the point more virtuously, more hypocritically and, in short, more
pleasantly: people are much more artistic than they think. – In the middle
of a lively conversation I will often see the other person’s face expressing
his thoughts (or the thoughts I attribute to him) with a degree of clarity
and detail that far exceeds the power of my visual ability: – such subtlety
of muscle movement and ocular expression must have come from my
own imagination. In all likelihood the person had an entirely different
expression, or none at all.


Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit: but vice versa too. What we experience
in dreams, as long as we experience it often enough, ends up belonging to
the total economy of our soul just as much as anything we have “really”
experienced. Such experiences make us richer or poorer, we have one
need more or less, and ﬁnally, in the bright light of day and even in the
clearest moments when minds are wide awake, we are coddled a little
by the habits of our dreams. Suppose someone frequently dreams that
he is ﬂying, and as soon as he starts dreaming he becomes aware of the
art and ability of ﬂight as his privilege as well as his most particular,
most enviable happiness – someone like this, who thinks he can negotiate
every type of curve and corner with the slightest impulse, who knows the
feeling of an assured, divine ease, an “upwards” without tension or force, a
“downwards” without condescension or abasement – without heaviness! –
how could someone with dream experiences and dream habits like these
not see that the word “happiness” is colored and determined differently in
his waking day too! how could his demands for happiness not be different?


“What happened in the light goes on in the dark.”



On the natural history of morals
Compared to this “ﬂying,” the “soaring upwards” that the poets describe
will have to be too terrestrial, muscular, violent, even too “heavy” for
him.


Human diversity is apparent not only in the variety of people’s tables
of goods – which is to say the fact that they consider different goods
worthwhile and that they disagree with each other as to the more or less
of values, the rank order of commonly acknowledged goods: – diversity
is much more evident in what they think counts as actually owning and
possessing a good. When it comes to a woman, for instance, a more modest
person might consider disposal over her body and sexual usage as sufﬁcient and satisfactory signs of possession, of ownership. Someone else
with a more suspicious and demanding thirst for possession will see the
“question-mark” here, the fact that this is only the appearance of possession; such a person will want to examine more closely in order to be
particularly clear as to whether the woman will give not only herself to
him, but also give up what she has or wants for the sake of him –: only
this will count as “possession” for him. But even this would not satisfy
the mistrust and possessive desires of a third person, who asks himself
whether the woman who gives up everything for his sake is not doing this
for some sort of a fantasized version of him. He wants to be thoroughly
(even meticulously) well known before he is able to be loved at all; he
does not dare to let anyone ﬁgure him out –. He will not feel that he possesses his beloved fully until she harbors no illusions about him, until she
loves him just as much for his devilishness and hidden inexhaustibility
as for his goodness, patience, and spirituality. Someone might want to
possess a people, and he ﬁnds all the higher arts of the Cagliostro and
Catilina suited to this goal. Someone else with a more subtle thirst for
possession will say to himself “one should not deceive where one wants
to possess” –. He becomes irritated and impatient at the thought that a
mask of himself rules the hearts of the people: “which is why I have to
let myself be known, and above all know myself !” Among helpful and
charitable people you typically discover that clumsy piece of deceit that
makes somebody ready before helping him: for instance, acting as if he
“deserves” help, requires precisely their help, and will prove to be deeply
grateful, devoted, and obsequious for any help they give him, – with


Beyond Good and Evil
these fantasies they treat the needy like their own property, since they
are helpful and charitable out of a desire for property. You will ﬁnd them
jealous if you cross them while they are being charitable, or beat them to it.
Parents involuntarily make children into something similar to themselves
and call it “bringing them up.” No mother doubts at the bottom of her
heart that, in the child, she has given birth to a piece of property; no
father questions his right to subject the child to his own ideas and valuations. In fact, there was a time (among the ancient Germans, for instance)
when it seemed fair that the father should dispose of the life and death
of the newborn as he saw ﬁt. And now it is the teacher, the social class,
the priest, and the prince who, like the father, see every new person as an
incontrovertible opportunity for a new possession. And it follows from
this . . .


The Jews – a people “born for slavery” as Tacitus and the entire ancient
world say, “the people chosen of all peoples” as they themselves say and
think – the Jews have achieved that miraculous thing, an inversion of
values, thanks to which life on earth has had a new and dangerous charm
for several millennia: – their prophets melted together “rich,” “godless,”
“evil,” “violent,” “sensual” and for the ﬁrst time coined an insult out of the
word “world.” The signiﬁcance of the Jewish people lies in this inversion
of values (which includes using the word for “poor” as a synonym for
“holy” and “friend”): the slave revolt in morality begins with the Jews.


We infer the existence of innumerable dark bodies lying close to the sun, –
ones that we will never see. Between you and me, this is a parable; and
a psychologist of morals will read the entire book of the stars only as a
language of signs and parables in which much is left silent.


You utterly fail to understand beasts of prey and men of prey (like Cesare
Borgia), you fail to understand “nature” if you are still looking for a


Tacitus, Historiae, V, .



On the natural history of morals
“disease” at the heart of these healthiest of all tropical monsters and
growths, or particularly if you are looking for some innate “hell” in them –:
as almost all moralists so far have done. Does it seem that moralists harbor a hatred against tropics and primeval forests? And that they need to
discredit the “tropical man” at all cost, whether as a disease or degeneration of man, or as his own hell and self-martyrdom? But why? In favor of
“temperate zones?” In favor of temperate men? Of “moralists”? Of the
mediocre? – This for the chapter: “Morality as Timidity.” –


All these morals directed at the individual person to promote what people call his “happiness” – are they anything other than recommendations
for constraint, in proportion to the degree of danger in which the individual person lives his life? or cures for his passions, his good and
bad tendencies to the extent that they have will to power and want to
play master? or large or small acts of cleverness and artiﬁce, tainted with
the stale smell of old folk-remedies and old wives’ wisdom? They are
all baroque in form and unreasonable (because they are directed at “everyone,” because they generalize what should not be generalized); they
all speak unconditionally, consider themselves unconditional; they are
all seasoned with more than just one grain of salt – in fact, they only
become tolerable, and occasionally even seductive, when they learn to
smell over-spiced, dangerous, and, above all, “other-worldly.” – On an
intellectual scale, all this is of little value and not even remotely “scientiﬁc” let alone “wise”; instead, to say it again (and again and again),
it is clever, clever, clever mixed with stupid, stupid, stupid, – whether
we are talking about that indifference and stone column coldness which
the Stoics prescribed and applied as a cure for the feverish idiocy of
the affects; or that no-more-laughter, no-more-tears of Spinoza, who so
naively champions the destruction of the affects through analysis and
vivisection; or that method of tuning down the affects to a harmless mean
where they might be satisﬁed, the Aristotelianism of morals; or even
morality as the enjoyment of affects, intentionally watered down and
spiritualized through the symbolism of art, like music, for instance, or the
love of God and the love of men for the sake of God – since in religion
the passions regain their civil rights, provided that . . . ; and ﬁnally, even
that easy and high-spirited surrender to the affects taught by Haﬁz and


Beyond Good and Evil
Goethe, that bold slackening of the reins, that spiritual-physical licentia
morum in the special cases of smart old eccentrics and drunks, where
there “isn’t much danger anymore.” This also for the chapter: “Morality
as Timidity.”


For as long as there have been people, there have been herds of people as well (racial groups, communities, tribes, folk, states, churches),
and a very large number of people who obey compared to relatively
few who command. So, considering the fact that humanity has been
the best and most long-standing breeding ground for the cultivation
of obedience so far, it is reasonable to suppose that the average person has an innate need to obey as a type of formal conscience that commands: “Thou shalt unconditionally do something, unconditionally not
do something,” in short: “Thou shalt.” This need tries to satisfy itself
and give its form a content, so, like a crude appetite, it indiscriminately
grabs hold and accepts whatever gets screamed into its ear by some commander or another – a parent, teacher, the law, class prejudice, public
opinion – according to its strength, impatience, and tension. The oddly
limited character of human development – its hesitancy and lengthiness, its frequent regressions and reversals – is due to the fact that the
herd instinct of obedience is inherited the best and at the cost of the
art of commanding. If we imagine this instinct ever advancing to its furthest excesses, in the end there will be nobody with independence or
the ability to command; or, such people will suffer inwardly from bad
consciences and need to fool themselves into thinking that they too are
only obeying before they are able to command. This is in fact the situation in Europe today; I call it the moral hypocrisy of the commanders. They do not know how to protect themselves from their bad consciences except by acting like executors of older or higher commands
(from their ancestors, constitution, justice system, laws, or God himself) or even by borrowing herd maxims from the herd mentality, such
as the “ﬁrst servants of the people,” or the “instruments of the commonweal.” For his part, the herd man of today’s Europe gives himself the
appearance of being the only permissible type of man and gloriﬁes those


Moral license.



On the natural history of morals
characteristics that make him tame, easy-going and useful to the herd as
the true human virtues, namely: public spirit, goodwill, consideration, industry, moderation, modesty, clemency, and pity. But in those cases where
people think they cannot do without a leader and bellwether, they keep
trying to replace the commander with an agglomeration of clever herd
men: this is the origin of all representative constitutions, for example.
What a relief it is for these European herd animals, what a deliverance
from an increasingly intolerable pressure, when, in spite of everything,
someone appears who can issue unconditional commands; the impact of
Napoleon’s appearance is the last major piece of evidence for this: – the
history of Napoleon’s impact is practically the history of the higher happiness attained by this whole century in its most worthwhile people and
moments.


In an age of disintegration where the races are mixed together, a person
will have the legacy of multiple lineages in his body, which means conﬂicting (and often not merely conﬂicting) drives and value standards that
ﬁght with each other and rarely leave each other alone. A man like this,
of late cultures and refracted lights, will typically be a weaker person: his
most basic desire is for an end to the war that he is. His notion of happiness corresponds to that of a medicine and mentality of paciﬁcation (for
instance the Epicurean or Christian); it is a notion of happiness as primarily rest, lack of disturbance, repletion, unity at last and the “Sabbath of
Sabbaths,” to speak with the holy rhetorician Augustine, who was himself
this sort of person. – But if conﬂict and war affect such a nature as one
more stimulus and goad to life –, and if genuine proﬁciency and ﬁnesse in
waging war with himself (which is to say: the ability to control and outwit
himself) are inherited and cultivated along with his most powerful and
irreconcilable drives, then what emerge are those amazing, incomprehensible, and unthinkable ones, those human riddles destined for victory and
for seduction; Alcibiades and Caesar are the most exquisite expressions
of this type (– and I will gladly set by their side that ﬁrst European after my taste, the Hohenstaufen Frederick II), and among artists perhaps
Leonardo da Vinci. They appear in exactly those ages when that weaker
type, with his longing for peace, comes to the fore. These types belong
together and derive from the same set of causes.


Beyond Good and Evil


As long as herd utility is the only utility governing moral value judgments,
as long as the preservation of the community is the only thing in view and
questions concerning immorality are limited to those things that seem
to threaten the survival of the community; as long as this is the case,
there cannot yet be a “morality of neighbor love.” Suppose that even
here, consideration, pity, propriety, gentleness, and reciprocity of aid are
already practiced in a small but steady way; suppose that even in this
state of society, all the drives that would later come to be called by the
honorable name of “virtues” (and, in the end, basically coincide with the
concept of “morality”) – suppose that they are already active: at this point
they still do not belong to the realm of moral valuations at all – they are
still extra-moral. During the best days of Rome, for instance, an act done
out of pity was not called either good or evil, moral or immoral; and if it
were praised on its own, the praise would be perfectly compatible with a
type of reluctant disdain as soon as it was held up against any action that
served to promote the common good, the res publica. Ultimately, the
“love of the neighbor” is always somewhat conventional, willfully feigned
and beside the point compared to fear of the neighbor. After the structure of
society seems on the whole to be established and secured against external
dangers, it is this fear of the neighbor that again creates new perspectives of
moral valuation. Until now, in the spirit of common utility, certain strong
and dangerous drives such as enterprise, daring, vindictiveness, cunning,
rapacity, and a domineering spirit must have been not only honored (under
different names than these of course), but nurtured and cultivated (since,
given the threats to the group, they were constantly needed against the
common enemies). Now, however, since there are no more escape valves
for these drives, they are seen as twice as dangerous and, one by one, they
are denounced as immoral and abandoned to slander. Now the opposite
drives and inclinations come into moral favor; step by step, the herd
instinct draws its conclusion. How much or how little danger there is to
the community or to equality in an opinion, in a condition or affect, in a
will, in a talent, this is now the moral perspective: and fear is once again
the mother of morality. When the highest and strongest drives erupt in
passion, driving the individual up and out and far above the average, over
the depths of the herd conscience, the self-esteem of the community is


Commonwealth.



On the natural history of morals
destroyed – its faith in itself, its backbone, as it were, is broken: as a result,
these are the very drives that will be denounced and slandered the most.
A high, independent spiritedness, a will to stand alone, even an excellent
faculty of reason, will be perceived as a threat. Everything that raises
the individual over the herd and frightens the neighbor will henceforth
be called evil; the proper, modest, unobtrusive, equalizing attitude and
the mediocrity of desires acquire moral names and honors. Finally, in
very peaceable circumstances there are fewer and fewer opportunities
and less and less need to nurture an instinct for severity or hardness; and
now every severity starts disturbing the conscience, even where justice is
concerned. A high and hard nobility and self-reliance is almost offensive,
and provokes suspicion; “the lamb,” and “the sheep” even more, gains
respect. – There is a point in the history of a society when it becomes
pathologically enervated and tenderized and it takes sides, quite honestly
and earnestly, with those who do it harm, with criminals. Punishment: that
seems somehow unjust to this society, – it certainly ﬁnds the thoughts of
“punishment” and “needing to punish” both painful and frightening.
“Isn’t it enough to render him unthreatening? Why punish him as well?
Punishment is itself fearful!” – with these questions, the herd morality,
the morality of timidity, draws its ﬁnal consequences. If the threat, the
reason for the fear, could be totally abolished, this morality would be
abolished as well: it would not be necessary any more, it would not consider
itself necessary any more! Anyone who probes the conscience of today’s
European will have to extract the very same imperative from a thousand
moral folds and hiding places, the imperative of herd timidity: “we want
the day to come when there is nothing more to fear!” The day to come – the
will and way to that day is now called “progress” everywhere in Europe.


Let us immediately repeat what we have already said a hundred times
before, since there are no ready ears for such truths – for our truths –
these days. We know all too well how offensive it sounds when someone
classiﬁes human beings as animals, without disguises or allegory; and we
are considered almost sinful for constantly using expressions like “herd,”
and “herd instinct” with direct reference to people of “modern ideas.”
So what? We cannot help ourselves, since this is where our new insights
happen to lie. Europe, we have found, has become unanimous in all major


Beyond Good and Evil
moral judgments; and this includes the countries under Europe’s inﬂuence. People in Europe clearly know what Socrates claimed not to know,
and what that famous old snake once promised to teach, – people these
days “know” what is good and evil. Now it must sound harsh and strike
the ear quite badly when we keep insisting on the following point: what
it is that claims to know here, what gloriﬁes itself with its praise and
reproach and calls itself good is the instinct of the herd animal man,
which has come to the fore, gaining and continuing to gain predominance
and supremacy over the other instincts, in accordance with the growing
physiological approach and approximation whose symptom it is. Morality in Europe these days is the morality of herd animals: – and therefore,
as we understand things, it is only one type of human morality beside
which, before which, and after which many other (and especially higher)
moralities are or should be possible. But this morality ﬁghts tooth and
nail against such a “possibility” and such a “should”: it stubbornly and
ruthlessly declares “I am morality itself and nothing else is moral!” And in
fact, with the aid of a religion that indulged and ﬂattered the loftiest herd
desires, things have reached the point where this morality is increasingly
apparent in even political and social institutions: the democratic movement is the heir to Christianity. But there are indications that the tempo
of this morality is still much too slow and lethargic for those who have less
patience, those who are sick or addicted to the above-mentioned instinct.
This is attested to by the increasingly frantic howling, the increasingly
undisguised snarling of the anarchist dogs that now wander the alleyways
of European culture, in apparent opposition to the peaceable and industrious democrats and ideologists of revolution, and still more to the silly
philosophasters and brotherhood enthusiasts who call themselves socialists and want a “free society.” But, in fact, they are one and all united
in thorough and instinctive hostility towards all forms of society besides
that of the autonomous herd (even to the point of rejecting the concepts of
“master” and “slave” – ni dieu ni maı̂tre reads a socialist formula –); they
are united in their dogged opposition to any special claims, special rights,
or privileges (which means, in the last analysis, that they are opposed
to any rights: since when everyone is equal, no one will need “rights”
anymore –); they are united in their mistrust of punitive justice (as if it
were a violation of those who are weaker, a wrong against the necessary


Neither God nor master.



On the natural history of morals
result of all earlier societies –); but they are likewise united in the religion
of pity, in sympathy for whatever feels, lives, suffers (down to the animal
and up to “God”: – the excessive notion of “pity for God” belongs in a
democratic age –); they are all united in the cries and the impatience of
pity, in deadly hatred against suffering in general, in the almost feminine
inability to sit watching, to let suffering happen; they are united in the
way they involuntarily raise the general level of sensitivity and gloom under whose spell Europe seems threatened with a new Buddhism; they are
united in their faith in the morality of communal pity, as if it were morality
in itself, the height, the achieved height of humanity, the sole hope for the
future, the solace of the present, the great redemption of all guilt from
the past: – they are all united in their faith in the community as Redeemer,
which is to say: in the herd, in “themselves”. . .


We who have a different faith –, we who consider the democratic movement to be not merely an abased form of political organization, but rather
an abased (more speciﬁcally a diminished) form of humanity, a mediocritization and depreciation of humanity in value: where do we need to
reach with our hopes? – Towards new philosophers, there is no alternative; towards spirits who are strong and original enough to give impetus
to opposed valuations and initiate a revaluation and reversal of “eternal
values”; towards those sent out ahead; towards the men of the future who
in the present tie the knots and gather the force that compels the will of
millennia into new channels. To teach humanity its future as its will, as
dependent on a human will, to prepare for the great risk and wholesale
attempt at breeding and cultivation and so to put an end to the gruesome rule of chance and nonsense that has passed for “history” so far
(the nonsense of the “greatest number” is only its latest form): a new
type of philosopher and commander will be needed for this some day, and
whatever hidden, dreadful, or benevolent spirits have existed on earth will
pale into insigniﬁcance beside the image of this type. The image of such
leaders hovers before our eyes: – may I say this out loud, you free spirits?
The conditions that would have to be partly created and partly exploited
for them to come into being; the probable paths and trials that would
enable a soul to grow tall and strong enough to feel the compulsion for
these tasks; a revaluation of values whose new pressure and hammer will


Beyond Good and Evil
steel a conscience and transform a heart into bronze to bear the weight
of a responsibility like this; and, on the other hand, the necessity of such
leaders, the terrible danger that they could fail to appear or simply fail
and degenerate – these are our real worries and dark clouds, do you know
this, you free spirits? These are the heavy, distant thoughts and storms
that traverse the sky of our lives. There are few pains as intense as ever
having seen, guessed, or sympathized while an extraordinary person ran
off course and degenerated: but someone with an uncommon eye for the
overall danger that “humanity” itself will degenerate, someone like us, who
has recognized the outrageous contingency that has been playing games
with the future of humanity so far – games in which no hand and not even
a “ﬁnger of God” has taken part! – someone who has sensed the disaster that lies hidden in the idiotic guilelessness and credulity of “modern
ideas,” and still more in the whole of Christian-European morality: someone like this will suffer from an unparalleled sense of alarm. In a single
glance he will comprehend everything that could be bred from humanity,
given a favorable accumulation and intensiﬁcation of forces and tasks; he
will know with all the prescience of his conscience how humanity has still
not exhausted its greatest possibilities, and how often the type man has
already faced mysterious decisions and new paths: – he will know even
better, from his most painful memories, the sorts of miserable things that
generally shatter, crush, sink, and turn a development of the highest rank
into a miserable affair. The total degeneration of humanity down to what
today’s socialist fools and nitwits see as their “man of the future” – as their
ideal! – this degeneration and diminution of humanity into the perfect
herd animal (or, as they say, into man in a “free society”), this brutalizing process of turning humanity into stunted little animals with equal
rights and equal claims is no doubt possible! Anyone who has ever thought
this possibility through to the end knows one more disgust than other
men, – and perhaps a new task as well! . . .



Part  We scholars

At the risk that moralizing will prove once again to be what it always was
(namely, an undismayed montrer ses plaies, in the words of Balzac), I will
dare to speak out against an inappropriate and harmful shift in the rank
order between science and philosophy; this shift has gone completely unnoticed and now threatens to settle in with what looks like the clearest of
consciences. I mean: people need to speak from experience (and experience
always seems to mean bad experience, doesn’t it?) when it comes to such
lofty questions of rank, or else they are like blind people talking about
colors or like women and artists speaking out against science (“Oh, this
awful science,” their instincts and shame will sigh, “it always gets to the
bottom of things!” –). The scientiﬁc man’s declaration of independence,
his emancipation from philosophy, is one of the more subtle effects of the
democratic way of life (and death): this self-gloriﬁcation and presumptuousness of the scholar is in the full bloom of spring, ﬂowering everywhere
you look, – which isn’t to say that this self-importance has a pleasant smell.
“Away with all masters!” – that’s what the rabble instinct wants, even here.
And now that science has been so utterly successful in fending off theology, after having been its “handmaiden” for far too long, it is so high in
spirits and low on sense that it wants to lay down laws for philosophy and,
for once, play at being “master” – what am I saying! play at being philosopher. My memory (the memory of a scientiﬁc man, if you will!) is teeming
with the arrogantly naive comments about philosophy and philosophers
that I have heard from young natural scientists and old physicians (not to


“Showing one’s wounds.”



Beyond Good and Evil
mention from the most erudite and conceited scholars of all, the philologists and schoolmen, who are both by profession –). Sometimes it was
the specialists and the pigeon-hole dwellers who instinctively resisted
all synthetic tasks and skills; at other times it was the diligent workers
who smelled the otium and the noble opulence of the philosopher’s psychic economy and consequently felt themselves restricted and belittled.
Sometimes it was that color-blindness of utilitarian-minded people who
considered philosophy to be just a series of refuted systems and a wasteful expenditure that never did anybody “any good.” Sometimes a fear of
disguised mysticism and changes to the limits of knowledge sprang up; at
other times, there was disdain for particular philosophers that had unwittingly become a disdain for philosophy in general. In the end, I have found
that what usually lies behind young scholars’ arrogant devalorizations of
philosophy is the nasty after-effect of some philosopher himself. These
scholars had, for the most part, stopped listening to this philosopher, but
without having emerged from under the spell of his dismissive valuations
of other philosophers: – and this resulted in a generalized ill will against
all philosophy. (The after-affects of Schopenhauer on Germany in the
most recent past seem to me an example of this sort of thing: – with his
unintelligent ranting against Hegel, he has caused the whole of the last
generation of Germans to break off its ties to German culture, a culture
that, all things considered, represented a supreme and divinatory reﬁnement of the historical sense. But Schopenhauer was himself impoverished,
insensitive, un-German to the point of genius on precisely this point.)
Looking at the overall picture, the damage done to the respectability of
philosophy might be primarily due to the human, all-too-human, and,
in short, miserable condition of more recent philosophy itself, which has
held open the door to the rabble instinct. We have to admit the degree
to which our modern world has departed from the whole Heraclitean,
Platonic, Empedoclean type (or whatever names all these princely and
magniﬁcent hermits of the spirit might have had); and with what justice
a worthy man of science can feel that he is of a better type and a better lineage, given the sort of representatives of philosophy who, thanks
to current fashions, are just as much talked up these days as they are
washed up (in Germany, for instance, the two lions of Berlin: the anarchist Eugen Dühring and the amalgamist Eduard von Hartmann). And


Leisure.



We scholars
especially those hodgepodge philosophers who call themselves “philosophers of reality” or “positivists” – just the sight of them is enough to
instill a dangerous mistrust in the soul of an ambitious young scholar.
They are, at best, scholars and specialists themselves – you can just feel
it! They have all been defeated but then brought back under the domination of science; they had wanted something more of themselves at one
time (without any right to this “more” and its responsibility) – and now,
in word and in deed, they respectably, wrathfully, vengefully represent a
skepticism concerning philosophy’s master task and authority. In the end:
how could it be any other way! Science is thriving these days, its good
conscience shines in its face; meanwhile whatever state recent philosophy
has gradually sunk to, whatever is left of philosophy today, inspires mistrust and displeasure, if not ridicule and pity. A philosophy reduced to
“epistemology,” which is really no more than a timid epochism and doctrine of abstinence; a philosophy that does not even get over the threshold
and scrupulously denies itself the right of entry – that is a philosophy in
its last gasps, an end, an agony, something to be pitied. How could such a
philosophy – dominate?


There are so many different kinds of dangers involved in the development
of a philosopher these days that it can be doubted whether this fruit is still
capable of ripening at all. The height and width of the tower of science have
grown to be so monstrously vast that the philosopher is that much more
likely to become exhausted before he has even ﬁnished his education, or
to let himself grab hold of something and “specialize.” And so he is never
at his best, never reaches a high point in his development from which he
would be able to look over, look around, and look down. Or he gets there
too late, when he is already past his prime and his strength has started
to fade; or he gets there disabled, having become coarse and degenerate,
so that his gaze, his overall value judgment is largely meaningless. Perhaps the very reﬁnement of his intellectual conscience lets him hesitate
and be slowed down while underway; he is afraid of being seduced into
becoming a dilettante, a millipede with a thousand feet and a thousand
feelers; he knows too well that someone who has lost his self-respect will
no longer command or lead, even in the ﬁeld of knowledge: unless he wants
to become a great actor, a philosophical Cagliostro and rabble-rouser of


Beyond Good and Evil
spirits, in short, a seducer. In the end, this is a question of taste, even if
it is not a question of conscience. And just to double the philosopher’s
difﬁculties again, there is the additional fact that he demands a judgment
of himself, a Yes or a No, not about science but about life and the value
of life. It is only with reluctance that he comes to believe he has a right
or even a duty to render this sort of a judgment, and he has to draw on
the most wide-ranging (and perhaps the most disturbing and destructive)
experiences so that he can look – hesitantly, skeptically, silently – for a
path to this right and this belief. In fact, the masses have misjudged and
mistaken the philosopher for a long time, sometimes confusing him with
the scientiﬁc man and ideal scholar, and sometimes with the religiously
elevated, desensualized, desecularized enthusiasts and intoxicated men
of God. If you hear anyone praised these days for living “wisely” or “like
a philosopher” it basically just means he is “clever and keeps out of the
way.” To the rabble, wisdom seems like a kind of escape, a device or trick
for pulling yourself out of the game when things get rough. But the real
philosopher (and isn’t this how it seems to us, my friends?) lives “unphilosophically,” “unwisely,” in a manner which is above all not clever,
and feels the weight and duty of a hundred experiments and temptations
of life: – he constantly puts himself at risk, he plays the rough game . . .


Compared to a genius, which is to say: compared to a being that either
begets or gives birth (taking both words in their widest scope –), the scholar,
the average man of science, is somewhat like an old maid. Like her, he has
no expertise in the two most valuable acts performed by humanity. And,
as a sort of compensation, both the scholar and the old maid are admitted
to be respectable – respectability is always emphasized – although in both
cases we are annoyed by the obligatory nature of this admission. Let
us look more closely: what is the scientiﬁc man? In the ﬁrst place, he
is an ignoble type of person with the virtues that an ignoble type will
have: this type is not dominant, authoritative, or self-sufﬁcient. He is
industrious, he is patiently lined up in an orderly array, he is regular
and moderate in his abilities and needs, he has an instinct for his own
kind and for the needs of his kind. These needs include: that piece of


In German: Versuchen und Versuchungen (see note , p.  above).



We scholars
independence and green pasture without which there is no quiet for him
to work in, that claim to honor and acknowledgment (whose ﬁrst and
foremost presupposition is recognition and being recognizable –), that
sunshine of a good name, that constant seal on his value and his utility
which is needed, time and again, in order to overcome the inner mistrust
that lies at the bottom of the heart of all dependent men and herd animals.
It is only fair that the scholar has the diseases and bad habits of an ignoble
type as well. He is full of petty jealousies and has eyes like a hawk for the
base aspects of natures whose heights he cannot attain. He is friendly, but
only like someone who lets himself go without letting himself really ﬂow
out; and just when he is standing in front of people who really do ﬂow
out, he will act all the more cold and reserved, – at times like this, his
eye is like a smooth and unwilling lake that will no longer allow a single
ripple of joy or sympathy. The worst and most dangerous thing that a
scholar is capable of doing comes from his type’s instinct for mediocrity:
from that Jesuitism of mediocrity that instinctively works towards the
annihilation of the exceptional man and tries to break every taut bow
or – even better! – to unbend it. Unbending it with consideration, and, of
course, a gentle hand –, unbending it with friendly pity: that is the true art
of Jesuitism, which has always known how to introduce itself as a religion
of pity. –


However gratefully we might approach the objective spirit – and who hasn’t
been sick to death at least once of everything subjective, with its damned
ipsissimosity! – nevertheless, in the end we even have to be cautious of our
gratitude, and put an end to the exaggerated terms in which people have
recently been celebrating the desubjectivization and depersoniﬁcation of
spirit, as if this were some sort of goal in itself, some sort of redemption or
transﬁguration. This kind of thing tends to happen within the pessimist
school, which has reasons of its own for regarding “disinterested knowing” with the greatest respect. The objective man who no longer swears
or complains like the pessimist does, the ideal scholar who expresses the
scientiﬁc instinct as it ﬁnally blossoms and blooms all the way (after things
have gone partly or wholly wrong a thousand times over) – he is certainly


Nietzsche’s coinage from the Latin “ipsissima” meaning “very own.”



Beyond Good and Evil
one of the most expensive tools there is: but he belongs in the hands of
someone more powerful. He is only a tool, we will say: he is a mirror, – he
is not an “end in himself.” The objective man is really a mirror: he is used
to subordinating himself in front of anything that wants to be known,
without any other pleasure than that of knowing, of “mirroring forth.”
He waits until something comes along and then spreads himself gently
towards it, so that even light footsteps and the passing by of a ghostly
being are not lost on his surface and skin. He has so thoroughly become
a passageway and reﬂection of strange shapes and events, that whatever
is left in him of a “person” strikes him as accidental, often arbitrary, and
still more often as disruptive. It takes an effort for him to think back on
“himself,” and he is not infrequently mistaken when he does. He easily
confuses himself with others, he is wrong about his own basic needs, and
this is the only respect in which he is crude and careless. Maybe his health
is making him suffer, or the pettiness and provincial airs of a wife or a
friend, or the lack of companions and company, – all right then, he makes
himself think about his sufferings: but to no avail! His thoughts have already wandered off, towards more general issues, and by the next day he
does not know how to help himself any more than he knew the day before.
He has lost any serious engagement with the issue as well as the time to
spend on it: he is cheerful, not for lack of needs but for lack of hands to
grasp his neediness. The obliging manner in which he typically approaches
things and experiences, the sunny and natural hospitality with which he
accepts everything that comes at him, his type of thoughtless goodwill,
of dangerous lack of concern for Yeses and Noes: oh, there are plenty of
times when he has to pay for these virtues of his! – and being human, he
all too easily becomes the caput mortuum of these virtues. If you want him
to love or hate (I mean love and hate as a god, woman, or animal would
understand the terms –) he will do what he can and give what he can. But
do not be surprised if it is not much, – if this is where he comes across
as fake, fragile, questionable, and brittle. His love is forced, his hatred
artiﬁcial and more like un tour de force, a little piece of vanity and exaggeration. He is sincere only to the extent that he is allowed to be objective:
he is “nature” and “natural” only in his cheerful totality. His mirror-like
soul is forever smoothing itself out; it does not know how to afﬁrm or
negate any more. He does not command; and neither does he destroy.


Worthless residue.



We scholars
“Je ne méprise presque rien,” he says with Leibniz: that presque should not
be overlooked or underestimated! He is no paragon of humanity; he does
not go in front of anyone or behind. In general, he puts himself at too
great a distance to have any basis for choosing between good or evil. If
people have mistaken him for a philosopher for so long, for a Caesar-like
man who cultivates and breeds, for the brutal man of culture – then they
have paid him much too high an honor and overlooked what is most
essential about him, – he is a tool, a piece of slave (although, without a
doubt, the most sublime type of slave) but nothing in himself, – presque
rien! The objective person is a tool, an expensive measuring instrument
and piece of mirror art that is easily injured and spoiled and should be
honored and protected; but he is not a goal, not a departure or a fresh start,
he is not the sort of complementary person in which the rest of existence
justiﬁes itself. He is not a conclusion – and still less a beginning, begetter
or ﬁrst cause; there is nothing tough, powerful or self-supporting that
wants to dominate. Rather, he is only a gentle, brushed-off, reﬁned, agile
pot of forms, who ﬁrst has to wait for some sort of content or substance
in order “to shape” himself accordingly, – he is generally a man without
substance or content, a “selﬂess” man. And consequently, in parenthesi,
nothing for women. –


When a philosopher these days makes it known that he is not a skeptic, – and I hope that this could be detected in the account of the objective
spirit just given – everyone gets upset. People look at him apprehensively,
they have so many questions, questions . . . in fact, frightened eavesdroppers (and there are crowds of them these days) will begin to consider
him dangerous. It is as if they could hear, in his rejection of skepticism,
some sort of evil and ominous sound in the distance, as if a new explosive
were being tested somewhere, a dynamite of the spirit, perhaps a newly
discovered Russian nihiline, a pessimism bonae voluntatis that does not
just say No or will No, but – the very thought is terrible! – does No. It is
generally acknowledged nowadays that no tranquilizer or sedative works


“I despise almost nothing.” In lines that follow, presque means “almost” and presque rien means
“almost nothing.”



A neologism coined from “nihilism.”



Of goodwill.



Beyond Good and Evil
better against this type of “goodwill” – a will to the actual, violent negation of life – than skepticism, the soft, sweet, soothing, poppy ﬂower of
skepticism; and even Hamlet is prescribed by physicians today as a protection against “spirit” and its underground rumblings. “Aren’t people’s
ears already ﬁlled with enough bad sounds?” the skeptic asks, being a
friend of peace and almost a type of security police: “This subterranean
No is awful! Be quiet already, you pessimistic moles!” Which is to say: the
skeptic, that gentle creature, is all too easily frightened. His conscience
has been trained to jump at every no, or even at a decisive and hardened
yes, and to feel it like a bite. Yes! and No! – this is contrary to morality, as
far as he is concerned. Conversely, he loves to treat his virtues to a feast of
noble abstinence, when, for instance, he says, with Montaigne: “What do I
know?” Or with Socrates: “I know that I don’t know anything.” Or “I don’t
trust myself here, there aren’t any doors open to me.” Or: “Even if one
were open, why go in right away!” Or: “What good are rash hypotheses?
It might very well be good taste not to formulate any hypotheses at all.
When something is crooked, do you people really need to straighten it
right away? or plug something into every hole? Isn’t there plenty of time
for that? Doesn’t time have plenty of time? Oh, you ﬁends, why can’t you
just wait a while? Even uncertainty has its charms, even the Sphinx is a
Circe, even Circe was a philosopher.” – This is how a skeptic comforts
himself; and it is true that he needs some comfort. Skepticism is the most
spiritual expression of a certain complex physiological condition which in
layman’s terms is called weak nerves or a sickly constitution. It originates
whenever races or classes that have been separated for a long time are
suddenly and decisively interbred. The different standards and values,
as it were, get passed down through the bloodline to the next generation
where everything is in a state of restlessness, disorder, doubt, experimentation. The best forces have inhibitory effects, the virtues themselves do
not let each other strengthen and grow, both body and soul lack a center of balance, a center of gravity and the assurance of a pendulum. But
what is most profoundly sick and degenerate about such hybrids is the
will: they no longer have any sense of independence in decision-making,
or the bold feeling of pleasure in willing, – they doubt whether there is
“freedom of will,” even in their dreams. Our contemporary Europe, the
site of an absurdly sudden experiment in the radical mixing of classes and
consequently of races, is therefore skeptical from its heights to its depths,
sometimes with that agile kind of skepticism that leaps impatiently and


We scholars
licentiously from one branch to another; at other times it is gloomy like
a cloud overloaded with question-marks – and often sick to death of its
will! Paralysis of the will: where won’t you ﬁnd this cripple today? And
often how nicely dressed! How seductively dressed! This illness has the
prettiest fancy-dress clothes and liar’s outﬁts. And most of what presents
itself in the shop windows these days as “objectivity,” for instance, or
“scientiﬁcity,” “l’art pour l’art,” or “pure, will-less knowing,” is only
dressed-up skepticism and paralysis of the will, – I will vouch for this
diagnosis of the European disease. – The disease of the will has spread
unevenly across Europe. It appears greatest and most varied where the
culture has been at home for the longest period of time; and it becomes
increasingly faint to the extent that “the barbarian” still – or once again –
asserts his rights under the sagging robes of occidental cultivation. This
is why the will is most sick in present-day France, a fact which can be
logically concluded as easily as it can be palpably felt. France has always
had the brilliant historical sense to turn even disastrous changes of its
spirit into something charming and seductive. Now, it clearly indicates
its culturally dominant position within Europe by being the school and
showcase for all the magic spells of skepticism. The strength to will and,
in fact, a will to will at length, is somewhat more vigorous in Germany,
and stronger in the north of Germany than in the center. It is considerably stronger in England, Spain, and Corsica; in one place it is bound up
with apathy, in another, with hard heads, – not to mention Italy, which
is too young to know what it wants, and which ﬁrst needs to prove that
it can will –. But it is the strongest of all and the most amazing in that
vast intermediary zone where Europe, as it were, ﬂows back into Asia: in
Russia. There, the strength to will has been laid aside and stored up over
a long time; there, the will is waiting threateningly (uncertain whether as
a will of negation or of afﬁrmation), to be discharged (to borrow a favorite
term from today’s physicists). More than just Indian wars and Asian intrigues might be needed to relieve Europe of its greatest danger – inner
rebellions might be needed as well, the dispersion of the empire into small
bodies, and, above all, the introduction of parliamentary nonsense, added
to which would be the requirement that every man read his newspaper
over breakfast. This is not something I am hoping for. I would prefer
the opposite, – I mean the sort of increase in the threat Russia poses that


“Art for art’s sake.”



Beyond Good and Evil
would force Europe into choosing to become equally threatening and,
speciﬁcally, to acquire a single will by means of a new caste that would
rule over Europe, a long, terrible will of its own, that could give itself
millennia-long goals: – so that the long, spun-out comedy of Europe’s
petty provincialism and its dynastic as well as democratic fragmentation
of the will could ﬁnally come to an end. The time for petty politics is
over: the next century will bring the struggle for the domination of the
earth – the compulsion to great politics.


The extent to which the new, warlike age that we Europeans have obviously entered into may, perhaps, also be favorable to the development of
another, stronger type of skepticism – for the time being, I would like to
restrict my remarks on this matter to a parable that the friends of German
history will already understand. That completely unscrupulous devotee
of tall, handsome grenadiers who, as king of Prussia, brought a military
and skeptical genius into being (and with it, fundamentally, that new type
of German which is only now approaching in triumph), the questionable,
mad father of Frederick the Great, had the grasp and lucky claw of a
genius too, although on one point only: he knew what was missing in
Germany in those days, and which lack was a hundred times more urgent
and anxiety-provoking than the lack of something like education or social
decorum, – his dislike for young Frederick came from the anguish of a
profound instinct. Men were lacking; and he suspected, to his most bitter distress, that his own son was not man enough. He was wrong about
this, but who wouldn’t have been wrong in his place? He saw his son
falling prey to atheism, esprit, and the entertaining, happy-go-lucky spirit
of clever Frenchmen: he saw that enormous bloodsucker, the spider of
skepticism, in the background, and he suspected the incurable misery of a
heart that was no longer hard enough for evil or for good, of a shattered will
that no longer commanded, that was no longer able to command. Meanwhile, however, a harsher and more dangerous new type of skepticism was
growing in his son (and who knows how much it was encouraged precisely
by his father’s hatred and the icy melancholy of an isolated will?) – the


Frederick William I.



We scholars
skepticism of a bold masculinity, which is most closely related to the genius
for war and conquest, and which ﬁrst entered Germany in the shape of
the great Frederick. This skepticism despises and nevertheless appropriates; it undermines and takes possession; it does not believe but does not
die out on this account; it gives the spirit a dangerous freedom, but is
severe on the heart. The German form of skepticism (being a continued
Frederickianism that has been intensiﬁed to the most spiritual degree)
has put Europe under the dominion of German spirit with its critical and
historical mistrust for a long time. Thanks to the unyielding strength
and tenacity in the masculine character of the great German philologists
and critical historians (seen properly, they were also all artists of decay and
destruction), and in spite of all the romanticism in music and philosophy,
a new concept of the German spirit is gradually emerging, and it clearly
tends towards a masculine skepticism: it might be the intrepidity of the
gaze, the courage and severity of the dissecting hand, or the tenacious will
to dangerous voyages of discovery, to spiritualized North Pole expeditions
under desolate and dangerous skies. Warm-blooded and superﬁcial humanitarians may have good reasons for crossing themselves in front of
this spirit; cet esprit fataliste, ironique, méphistophélique as Michelet calls
it, not without a shudder. But this “man” in the German spirit, which
has awoken Europe from its “dogmatic slumber,” – if you want to understand how distinctive the fear of this “man” really is, just remember
the earlier conception that this one had to overcome, – and how it was
not so long ago that a masculinized woman could dare, with boundless
presumption, to commend the Germans to European sympathies as gentle, good-hearted, weak-willed, poetic fools. You can really understand
Napoleon’s surprise when he got to see Goethe: it showed what people
had understood by the term “German spirit” for centuries. “Voilà un
homme! ” – which was to say: “Now there’s a man! And I’d only expected a
German!” –



“This fatalistic, ironical, Mephistophelian spirit.”
An allusion to Kant’s claim in the Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik (Prolegomena
to any Future Metaphysics) () that Hume’s empiricism awoke him from the dogmatic slumber
of rationalism.



Madame de Staël in her De l’Allemagne (On Germany) ().



See Goethe’s Unterredung mit Napoleon (Discussion with Napoleon) ( October ).



Beyond Good and Evil


So, if something in the image of future philosophers makes us suspect that
they will, perhaps, be skeptics (in the sense just mentioned), then it would
only indicate some aspect of them and not who they themselves really are.
They could be called critics with equal justiﬁcation; and they will certainly
be engaged in experiments. I have already laid particular emphasis on the
notions of tempting, attempting, and the joy of experimenting in the name
that I have dared to christen them with: is this because, as critics in body
and soul, they love to experiment in a new, perhaps broader, perhaps more
dangerous sense? In their passion for knowledge, won’t they need to go
further, with bold and painful experiments, than the faint-hearted, pampered taste of a democratic century can think proper? – Without a doubt:
these coming philosophers will be least able to dispense with the qualities
that distinguish the critic from the skeptic – qualities that are rather serious and by no means harmless. I mean: the certainty of value standards, the
conscious implementation of a unity of method, a sly courage, a solitary
stance, and capacity for responsibility. In fact, these philosophers admit
to taking pleasure in saying no, in dissecting, and in a certain level-headed
cruelty that knows how to guide a knife with assurance and subtlety, even
when the heart is bleeding. They will be more severe (and perhaps not
always with themselves alone) than humane people might wish them to
be. They will not engage with “truth” in such a way that it “pleases” or
“elevates” or “inspires” them; they will hardly believe that the truth, of
all things, would keep the feelings this amused. These severe spirits will
smile when they hear someone say: “This thought elevates me: how could
it fail to be true?” Or: “This work charms me: how could it fail to be beautiful?” Or: “That artist ennobles me: how could he fail to be noble?” – they
might be ready not just with a smile but with a genuine disgust for all these
over-enthusiasms, idealisms, femininities, hermaphrodisms. And anyone
who knows how to follow these spirits down into the secret chambers of
their heart is not likely to discover any intention to reconcile “Christian
feelings” with “ancient taste” or with anything like “modern parliamentarianism” (although these sorts of conciliatory overtures are said to take
place in our very uncertain and consequently very conciliatory century,
even among philosophers). These philosophers of the future will demand
(and not only of themselves) critical discipline and every habit that leads to
cleanliness and rigor in matters of the spirit. They might even wear these


We scholars
like a type of jewel they have on display, – nevertheless, they still do not
want to be called critics. They think it is no small disgrace for philosophy
these days, when people are so happy to announce: “Philosophy itself is
criticism and critical science – and nothing else whatsoever!” However
much all the French and German positivists might approve of this evaluation of philosophy (– and it might even have ﬂattered Kant’s heart and
taste: just think of the titles of his major works –), our new philosophers
will nevertheless say: critics are tools of philosophy and that is precisely
why, being tools, they are so far from being philosophers! Even the great
Chinaman of Königsberg was only a great critic. –


I am going to insist that people ﬁnally stop mistaking philosophical laborers and scientiﬁc men in general for philosophers, – that here, of all
places, people be strict about giving “each his due” and not too much to
the one, and much too little to the other. In the course of his education,
the genuine philosopher might have been required to stand on each of the
steps where his servants, the philosophical scientiﬁc laborers, have come
to a stop, – have had to come to a stop. Perhaps the philosopher has had
to be a critic and a skeptic and a dogmatist and historian and, moreover,
a poet and collector and traveler and guesser of riddles and moralist and
seer and “free spirit” and practically everything, in order to run through
the range of human values and value feelings and be able to gaze with
many eyes and consciences from the heights into every distance, from the
depths up to every height, from the corner onto every expanse. But all
these are only preconditions for his task: the task itself has another will, –
it calls for him to create values. The project for philosophical laborers on
the noble model of Kant and Hegel is to establish some large class of given
values (which is to say: values that were once posited and created but have
come to dominate and have been called “truths” for a long time) and press
it into formulas, whether in the realm of logic or politics (morality) or art.
It is up to these researchers to make everything that has happened or been
valued so far look clear, obvious, comprehensible, and manageable, to abbreviate everything long, even “time” itself, and to overwhelm the entire
past. This is an enormous and wonderful task, in whose service any subtle


An allusion to Kant, who spent his life in Königsberg.



Beyond Good and Evil
pride or tough will can certainly ﬁnd satisfaction. But true philosophers are
commanders and legislators: they say “That is how it should be!” they are
the ones who ﬁrst determine the “where to?” and “what for?” of people,
which puts at their disposal the preliminary labor of all philosophical laborers, all those who overwhelm the past. True philosophers reach for
the future with a creative hand and everything that is and was becomes
a means, a tool, a hammer for them. Their “knowing” is creating, their
creating is a legislating, their will to truth is – will to power. – Are there
philosophers like this today? Have there ever been philosophers like this?
Won’t there have to be philosophers like this? . . .


It seems increasingly clear to me that the philosopher, being necessarily a
person of tomorrow and the day after tomorrow, has, in every age, been
and has needed to be at odds with his today: his enemy has always been
the ideal of today. So far, all these extraordinary patrons of humanity who
are called philosophers (and who have seldom felt like friends of wisdom,
but like disagreeable fools and dangerous question-marks instead –) have
found that their task, their harsh, unwanted, undeniable task (though in
the end, the greatness of their task) lay in being the bad conscience of their
age. In applying a vivisecting knife directly to the chest of the virtues of the
age, they gave away their own secret: to know a new greatness in humanity,
a new, untraveled path to human greatness. Every time they have done
this, they have shown how much hypocrisy and laziness, how much letting
yourself go and letting go of yourself, how many lies are hidden beneath
the most highly honored type of their present-day morality, and how much
virtue is out of date. Every time, they have said: “We need to go there, out
there, out where you feel least at home today.” When encountering a world
of “modern ideas” which would gladly banish everyone into a corner and
“specialization,” a philosopher (if there could be philosophers today)
would be compelled to locate the greatness of humanity, the concept
of “greatness,” in the very scope and variety of humanity, in its unity
in multiplicity. He would determine even value and rank according to
how much and how many things someone could carry and take upon
himself, how far someone could stretch his responsibility. Today, the will
is weakened and diluted by the tastes and virtues of the times, and nothing
is as timely as weakness of will: this is why precisely strength of will and


We scholars
the hardness and capacity for long-term resolutions must belong to the
concept of “greatness,” in the philosopher’s ideal. With equal justice,
the opposite doctrine and the ideal of a stupid, self-abnegating, humble,
selﬂess humanity was suited to an opposite age, to an age like the sixteenth
century that suffered from its accumulated energy of the will and from
the most savage ﬂoods and storm tides of egoism. In the age of Socrates,
among honest people with tired instincts, among conservatives of ancient
Athens who let themselves go – “toward happiness,” as they put it, toward
pleasure, as they did it – and who kept mouthing old, magniﬁcent words
(words that they had absolutely no right to use any more, given the lives
they were leading), – here, perhaps, irony was needed for greatness of
soul, that malicious, Socratic certainty of the old physician and man of
the rabble who cut brutally into his own ﬂesh like he cut into the ﬂesh and
heart of the “noble,” with a glance that spoke clearly enough: “Don’t act
some part in front of me! Here – we are equals!” These days, by contrast,
when only the herd animal gets and gives honor in Europe, when “equal
rights” could all too easily end up as equal wrongs (I mean, in waging a
joint war on everything rare, strange, privileged, on the higher man, higher
soul, higher duty, higher responsibility, on creative power and mastery) –
these days, the concept of “greatness” will include: being noble, wanting
to be for yourself, the ability to be different, standing alone and needing to
live by your own ﬁsts. And the philosopher will be revealing something of
his own ideal when he proposes: “Greatest of all is the one who can be the
most solitary, the most hidden, the most different, the person beyond good
and evil, the master of his virtues, the one with an abundance of will. Only
this should be called greatness: the ability to be just as multiple as whole,
just as wide as full.” And to ask once again: is greatness possible today?


It is difﬁcult to learn what a philosopher is, because it cannot be taught:
you have to “know” by experience, – or you should be proud that you
do not know it at all. But nowadays everyone talks about things that they
cannot experience, and most especially (and most terribly) when it comes
to philosophers and philosophical matters. Hardly anyone knows about
them or is allowed to know, and all popular opinions about them are false.
So, for instance, the genuinely philosophical compatibility between a bold
and lively spirituality that runs along at a presto, and a dialectical rigor and


Beyond Good and Evil
necessity that does not take a single false step – this is an experience most
thinkers and scholars would ﬁnd unfamiliar and, if someone were to mention it, unbelievable. They think of every necessity as a need, a painstaking
having-to-follow and being-forced; and they consider thinking itself as
something slow and sluggish, almost a toil and often enough “worth the
sweat of the noble.” Not in their wildest dreams would they think of it
as light, divine, and closely related to dance and high spirits! “Thinking”
and “treating an issue seriously,” “with gravity” – these belong together,
according to most thinkers and scholars: that is the only way they have
“experienced” it –. Artists might have a better sense of smell even in this
matter: they are the ones who know only too well that their feeling of
freedom, ﬁnesse and authority, of creation, formation, and control only
reaches its apex when they have stopped doing anything “voluntarily”
and instead do everything necessarily, – in short, they know that inside
themselves necessity and “freedom of the will” have become one. In the
last analysis, there is a rank order of psychic states which corresponds to
the rank order of problems; and the highest problems will ruthlessly repel
anyone who dares to get close without being predestined by sheer stature
and power of spirituality to reach a solution. What good is it if, as happens
so often these days, agile, ordinary minds or clumsy, worthy mechanists
and empiricists throng with their plebeian ambition to these problems
and into, as it were, the “inner courtyard”! But crude feet would never be
allowed on a carpet like this: this has already been provided for in the primordial laws of things. The door will stay barred against these intruders,
however much they push or pound their heads against it! You need to have
been born for any higher world; to say it more clearly, you need to have
been bred for it: only your descent, your ancestry can give you a right to
philosophy – taking that word in its highest sense. Even here, “bloodline”
is decisive. The preparatory labor of many generations is needed for a
philosopher to come about; each of his virtues needs to have been individually acquired, cared for, passed down, and incorporated: and not only
the bright, light, gentle gait and course of his thoughts, but above all the
eagerness for great responsibilities, the sovereignty of his ruling gazes and
downward gazes, the feeling of separation from the crowd with its duties
and virtues, the genial protection and defense of anything misunderstood
and slandered, whether it is god or devil, the pleasure and practice in
great justice, the art of command, the expanse of the will, the slow eye
that hardly ever admires, hardly ever looks up, hardly ever loves . . .


Part  Our virtues

Our virtues? – We probably still have our virtues too, although of course
they will not be those trusting and muscular virtues for which we hold our
grandfathers in honor – but also slightly at arm’s length. We Europeans
from the day after tomorrow, we ﬁrstborn of the twentieth century, – with
all of our dangerous curiosity, our diversity and art of disguises, our wornout and, as it were, saccharine cruelty in sense and in spirit, – if we happen
to have virtues, they will presumably only be the ones that have learned
best how to get along with our most secret and heartfelt propensities, with
our most fervent desires. So let us look for them in our labyrinths! where,
as we know, so many things lose their way, so many things get entirely lost.
And is there anything more beautiful than looking for your own virtues?
Doesn’t this almost mean: believing in your own virtue? But this “believing in your own virtue” – isn’t this basically what people used to call their
“good conscience,” that venerable, long-haired pigtail of a concept that
hung on the back of our grandfathers’ heads, and often enough behind
their intellects too? And so it seems that however up-to-date and unworthy of grandfatherly honor we might otherwise appear, there is nevertheless one respect in which we are the worthy grandchildren of these
grandfathers, we last Europeans with a good conscience: we still wear
their pigtail. – Oh! If you knew how soon, so soon now – things will be
different! . . .



Beyond Good and Evil


Just as in the celestial realm, the track of one planet will sometimes be
determined by two suns; just as, in certain cases, suns of different colors
will shine on a single planet with red light one moment and green light
the next, and then strike it again, inundating it with many colors all at
once: in the same way, thanks to the complex mechanics of our “starry
skies,” we modern men are determined by a diversity of morals; our actions
shine with different colors in turn, they are rarely unambiguous, – and it
happens often enough that we perform multi-colored actions.


To love your enemies? I think this has been learned quite well: it happens
thousands of times these days, in large and small ways; in fact, something
even higher and more sublime happens every once in a while – we learn to
despise when we love and precisely when we love the most. But all of this
is unconscious, noiseless, lacking in pomp or pageantry but possessing
that shame and concealed goodness which forbids the mouth from using
any solemn words or virtuous formulas. Morality as posturing – offends
our taste these days. This is progress too, just as it was progress for our
fathers when religion as posturing ﬁnally offended their taste, including
the hostility and Voltairean bitterness towards religion (and everything
that used to belong to the sign language of free spirits). No puritan litany,
moral homily, or petty bourgeois respectability wants to resonate with the
music in our conscience and the dance in our spirit.


Watch out for people who put a high value on being credited with moral
tact and with subtlety in making moral distinctions! They will never
forgive us if they ever make a mistake in front of us (or especially about
us), – they will inevitably become our instinctive slanderers and detractors,
even if they still remain our “friends.” Blessed are the forgetful: for they
will “have done” with their stupidities too.


The French psychologists – and where else are there still psychologists
today? – have never grown tired of their bitter and manifold delight in


Our virtues
the bêtise bourgeoise, somewhat as if . . . enough, this reveals something
about them. For instance, Flaubert, the good citizen of Rouen, ultimately
stopped seeing, hearing, or tasting anything else: this was his brand of
self-torture and subtler cruelty. Now – because this is getting boring – I
recommend another source of amusement for a change: the unconscious
cunning that all good, fat, well-behaved, mediocre spirits have shown towards higher spirits and their tasks, that subtle, intricate, Jesuitical cunning that is a thousand times more subtle than any taste or understanding
evinced by this middle class in its best moments – it is even more subtle
than its victims’ understanding (which is on-going proof that “instinct”
is the most intelligent type of intelligence discovered so far). In short, you
psychologists should study the philosophy of the “rule” in its struggle
against the “exception”: there you will see drama good enough for gods
and divine malice! Or, to be even more up to date: vivisect the “good
man,” the “homo bonae voluntatis” . . . yourselves!


Moral judgment and condemnation is the favorite revenge of the spiritually limited on those who are less so, as well as a type of compensation for
having been slighted by nature, and an opportunity to ﬁnally acquire spirit
and become reﬁned: – malice spiritualizes. It warms the bottom of their
hearts for there to be a standard that makes them the equal of even people
who are teeming with all the qualities and privileges of spirit: – they ﬁght
for the “equality of all before God” and almost need to believe in God for
this reason alone. Among them are the strongest opponents of atheism.
If anyone were to tell them that “a high spirituality is beyond comparison
with any sort of good behavior or worthiness of a merely moral man,” they
would be livid: – I certainly would not do it. I would rather ﬂatter them by
claiming that a high spirituality is itself only the ﬁnal, monstrous product
of moral qualities; that it is a synthesis of all the states attributed to the
“merely moral” men after they had been acquired individually, through
long discipline and practice, perhaps through whole series of generations;
that high spirituality is just the spiritualization of justice and a benevolent severity that knows how to charge itself with the preservation of the


Bourgeois stupidity.



“Man of goodwill.”



Beyond Good and Evil
order of rank in the world among things themselves – and not just among
people.


Given the popularity of the term “disinterested” in praising people these
days, we need to be aware (although this might prove dangerous) of what it
is that really interests the people and what sorts of things the common man
cares truly and deeply about (including educated people and even scholars
and, unless I am badly mistaken, the philosophers as well). The fact then
emerges that the overwhelming majority of things that interest and appeal to the more reﬁned and discriminating tastes, to every higher nature,
will strike the average person as utterly “uninteresting.” If he notices a
devotion to it anyway, then he calls it “désintéressé ” and wonders how it is
possible to act in a “disinterested” fashion. There have been philosophers
who have even known how to express this popular perplexity in a seductive
and mystico-otherworldly way (– perhaps because they did not have ﬁrsthand knowledge of higher natures?) – instead of laying down the naked
and fully proper truth that a “disinterested” action is a very interesting
and interested action, provided . . . “And love?” – What? Even an action
done out of love is supposed to be “unegoistic”? But you fools – ! “And
praise for the self-sacriﬁcing?” But anyone who has really made sacriﬁces
knows that he wanted and got something in return, – perhaps something
of himself in return for something of himself – that he gave up here in
order to have more there, perhaps in order to be more in general, or just
to feel like “more.” But this is a realm of questions and answers in which
a more discriminating spirit will not want to stay for very long: the truth
is already desperate to keep herself from yawning when she is required to
respond. In the end, she is a woman: we should not do violence to her.


“It sometimes happens,” said a moralistic pedant and stickler for detail,
“that I honor and esteem an altruistic person. Not because he is altruistic,
however, but because it seems to me that he has the right to help another
person at his own expense. Enough, it is always a question of who he is and
who that other is. For instance, in a person who was made and determined
for command, self-denial and modest retreat would not be a virtue but


Our virtues
the waste of a virtue: that is how it seems to me. Every unegoistic morality
that considers itself unconditional and is directed toward everyone does
not just sin against taste: it is a provocation to sins of omission, and one
more temptation under a mask of benevolence – a temptation and injury to
precisely the higher, the rarer, the privileged. Morals must be compelled
from the very start to bow before rank order, their presumptuousness must
be forced onto their conscience, – until they are ﬁnally in agreement with
each other that it is immoral to say: ‘What’s right for the one is fair for the
other.’ ” – So says my moralistic pedant and bonhomme: does he really
deserve to be laughed at for urging morals to morality in this way? But
you should not be too right if you want to get a laugh; a kernel of wrong
belongs to even a good taste.


Wherever pity is preached these days – and if you are listening properly, no
other religion is preached any more – let the psychologist open up his ears.
Through all the vanity, through all the noise that this preacher (like all
preachers) intrinsically possesses, the psychologist will hear the genuine,
rasping, groaning sound of self-hatred. This self-hatred belongs to the
darkening and increasing ugliness of Europe, which have been growing for
a hundred years now (and whose ﬁrst symptoms were already documented
in Galiani’s thought-provoking letter to Madame d’Epinay): if it is not
the cause! The man of “modern ideas,” this proud ape, is exceedingly
unhappy with himself: this is clear. He suffers: and his vanity would have
it that he only pities . . . 


The hybrid mixed man of Europe – a fairly ugly plebeian, all in all –
absolutely must have a costume: he needs history as a storage closet of
costumes. Of course, he notices that nothing really looks right on him, –
he keeps changing. Just look at these rapid preferences and changes in the
masquerade of styles over the course of the nineteenth century; and at the
moments of despair over the fact that “nothing suits” us –. It is pointless to



Good man.
In German: mit leidet (literally: “suffers with”). Here as elsewhere, Nietzsche is playing on the
similarities between the terms leiden (to suffer) and Mitleid (pity).



Beyond Good and Evil
dress up as romantic or classical or Christian or Florentine or Baroque or
“national,” in moribus et artibus: it “doesn’t look good”! But the “spirit,”
and particularly the “historical spirit,” ﬁnds that even this despair is to
its own advantage: again and again, a new piece of prehistory or foreign
country will be tried out, turned over, ﬁled away, packed up, and above all
studied. We are the ﬁrst age to be educated in puncto of “costumes,” I mean
of morals, articles of faith, artistic tastes, and religions, and prepared as no
age has ever been for a carnival in the grand style, for the most spiritually
carnivalesque laughter and high spirits, for the transcendental heights of
the highest inanity and Aristophanean world mockery. Perhaps it’s that
we still discover a realm of our invention here, a realm where we can
still be original too, as parodists of world history or buffoons of God, or
something like that, – perhaps it’s that, when nothing else from today has
a future, our laughter is the one thing that does!


The historical sense (or the ability quickly to guess the rank order of the valuations that a people, a society, an individual has lived by, the “divinatory
instinct” for the connections between these valuations, for the relationship
between the authority of values and the authority of effective forces): this
historical sense that we Europeans claim as our distinguishing characteristic comes to us as a result of that enchanting and crazy half-barbarism into
which Europe has been plunged through the democratic mixing of classes
and races, – only the nineteenth century sees this sense as its sixth sense.
Thanks to this mixture, the past of every form and way of life, of cultures
that used to lie side by side or on top of each other, radiates into us, we
“modern souls.” At this point, our instincts are running back everywhere
and we ourselves are a type of chaos –. “Spirit,” as I have said, eventually
ﬁnds that this is to its own advantage. Because of the half-barbarism in
our bodies and desires, we have secret entrances everywhere, like no noble
age has ever had, and, above all, access to the labyrinths of unﬁnished cultures and to every half-barbarism that has ever existed on earth. And since
the most considerable part of human culture to date has been just such
half-barbarism, the “historical sense” practically amounts to a sense and


In customs and arts.



With respect to.



Our virtues
instinct for everything, a taste and tongue for everything: by which it immediately shows itself to be an ignoble sense. For instance, we are enjoying
Homer again: knowing how to taste Homer might be our greatest advantage, one that people from a noble culture (such as seventeenth-century
Frenchmen, like Saint-Evremond, who reproached Homer for an esprit
vaste, and even Voltaire, their concluding note) do not and did not ﬁnd
very easy to acquire – and one that they would hardly allow themselves
to enjoy. The very precise Yes and No of their palate, their ready disgust,
their hesitant reserve about everything strange or exotic, their fear of the
poor taste of even a lively curiosity, and in general that unwillingness seen
in every noble and self-sufﬁcient culture to admit to itself a new lust, a
dissatisfaction with its own, an admiration of something foreign: all this
prejudices a noble culture and puts it at odds with even the best things
in the world, if they are not its property and could not become its spoils.
And no sense is more incomprehensible to such people than precisely
this historical sense with its obsequious plebeian curiosity. It is no different with Shakespeare, that amazing Spanish-Moorish-Saxon synthesis of
tastes that would have almost killed one of Aeschylus’ ancient Athenian
friends with either rage or laughter: but we – accept precisely this wild
burst of colors, this confusion of the most delicate, the crudest, and the
most artiﬁcial with a secret familiarity and warmth. We enjoy him as the
artistic reﬁnement that has been reserved just for us, and meanwhile we
do not let ourselves be bothered by the noxious fumes and the proximity
of the English rabble in which Shakespeare’s art and taste lives, any more
than we do on the Chiaja of Naples, for instance: where we go on our way
with all of our senses, enchanted and willing, however much the sewers
of the rabble districts are in the air. We men of “historical sense,” we do
have our virtues – this cannot be denied. We are unassuming, selﬂess,
modest, brave, full of self-overcoming, full of dedication, very grateful,
very patient, very accommodating: – but for all that we are, perhaps, not
very “tasteful.” Finally, let us admit to ourselves: what we men of “historical sense” ﬁnd the most difﬁcult to grasp, to feel, to taste again and
love again, what we are fundamentally biased against and almost hostile
towards, is just that perfected and newly ripened aspect of every art and
culture, the genuinely noble element in works and people, their moment
of smooth seas and halcyon self-sufﬁciency, the gold and the coldness


Enormous spirit.



Beyond Good and Evil
seen in all things that have perfected themselves. Perhaps our great virtue
of historical sense is necessarily opposed to good taste, at least to the very
best taste, and it is only poorly and haltingly, only with effort that we are
able to reproduce in ourselves the trivial as well as greatest serendipities
and transﬁgurations of human life as they light up every now and then:
those moments and marvels when a great force stands voluntarily still in
front of the boundless and limitless –, the enjoyment of an abundance of
subtle pleasure in suddenly harnessing and fossilizing, in settling down
and establishing yourself on ground that is still shaking. Moderation is
foreign to us, let us admit this to ourselves; our thrill is precisely the thrill
of the inﬁnite, the unmeasured. Like the rider on a steed snorting to go
further onward, we let the reins drop before the inﬁnite, we modern men,
we half-barbarians – and we feel supremely happy only when we are in
the most – danger.


Hedonism, pessimism, utilitarianism, eudamonianism: these are all ways
of thinking that measure the value of things according to pleasure and pain,
which is to say according to incidental states and trivialities. They are all
foreground ways of thinking and naivetés, and nobody who is conscious of
both formative powers and an artist’s conscience will fail to regard them
with scorn as well as pity. Pity for you! That is certainly not pity as you
understand it: it is not pity for social “distress,” for “society” with its
sick and injured, for people depraved and destroyed from the beginning
as they lie around us on the ground; even less is it pity for the grumbling, dejected, rebellious slave strata who strive for dominance – they
call it “freedom.” Our pity is a higher, more far-sighted pity: – we see
how humanity is becoming smaller, how you are making it smaller! – and
there are moments when we look on your pity with indescribable alarm,
when we ﬁght this pity –, when we ﬁnd your seriousness more dangerous
than any sort of thoughtlessness. You want, if possible (and no “if possible” is crazier) to abolish suffering. And us? – it looks as though we would
prefer it to be heightened and made even worse than it has ever been!
Well-being as you understand it – that is no goal; it looks to us like an
end ! – a condition that immediately renders people ridiculous and despicable – that makes their decline into something desirable! The discipline
of suffering, of great suffering – don’t you know that this discipline has


Our virtues
been the sole cause of every enhancement in humanity so far? The tension that breeds strength into the unhappy soul, its shudder at the sight of
great destruction, its inventiveness and courage in enduring, surviving,
interpreting, and exploiting unhappiness, and whatever depth, secrecy,
whatever masks, spirit, cunning, greatness it has been given: – weren’t
these the gifts of suffering, of the disciple of great suffering? In human
beings, creature and creator are combined: in humans there is material,
fragments, abundance, clay, dirt, nonsense, chaos; but in humans there
is also creator, maker, hammer-hardness, spectator-divinity and seventh
day: – do you understand this contrast? And that your pity is aimed at
the “creature in humans,” at what needs to be molded, broken, forged,
torn, burnt, seared and puriﬁed, – at what necessarily needs to suffer and
should suffer? And our pity – don’t you realize who our inverted pity is
aimed at when it ﬁghts against your pity as the worst of all pampering
and weaknesses? – Pity against pity, then! – But to say it again: there are
problems that are higher than any problems of pleasure, pain, or pity; and
any philosophy that stops with these is a piece of naiveté. –


We immoralists! – This world as it concerns us, in which we need to love
and be afraid, this almost invisible, inaudible world of subtle command,
subtle obedience, a world of the “almost” in every respect, twisted, tricky,
barbed, and loving: yes, it is well defended against clumsy spectators and
friendly curiosity! We have been woven into a strong net and shirt of
duties, and cannot get out of it –, in this sense we are “people of duty,” –
even us! It is true that we sometimes dance quite well in our “chains” and
between our “swords”; it is no less true that more often we grind our teeth
and feel impatient at all the secret harshness of our fate. But we can do as
we please: fools and appearances will speak up against us, claiming “those
are people without duties” – fools and appearances are always against us!


Genuine honesty, assuming that this is our virtue and we cannot get rid
of it, we free spirits – well then, we will want to work on it with all the


In German: Redlichkeit.



Beyond Good and Evil
love and malice at our disposal, and not get tired of “perfecting” ourselves
in our virtue, the only one we have left: may its glory come to rest like
a gilded, blue evening glow of mockery over this aging culture and its
dull and dismal seriousness! And if our genuine honesty nevertheless gets
tired one day and sighs and stretches its limbs and ﬁnds us too harsh and
would rather things were better, easier, gentler, like an agreeable vice: we
will stay harsh, we, who are the last of the Stoics! And we will help it
out with whatever devilishness we have – our disgust at clumsiness and
approximation, our “nitimur in vetitum,” our adventurer’s courage, our
sly and discriminating curiosity, our subtlest, most hidden, most spiritual
will to power and world-overcoming which greedily rambles and raves
over every realm of the future, – we will bring all of our “devils” to
help out our “god”! People will probably misjudge us and misconstrue
us on account of this: so what! People will say: “this ‘genuine honesty’ –
this is devilishness and absolutely nothing else!” So what! And even if
they were right! Haven’t all gods so far been devils like this, who have
became holy and been re-baptized? And, ultimately, what do we know
about ourselves? And what the spirit that leads us wants to be called? (It is
a question of names.) And how many spirits we are hiding? Our genuine
honesty, we free spirits, – let us make sure that it does not become our
vanity, our pomp and ﬁnery, our limitation, our stupidity! Every virtue
tends towards stupidity, every stupidity towards virtue; “stupid to the
point of holiness” they say in Russia, – let us make sure we do not end
up becoming saints or tedious bores out of genuine honesty! Isn’t life a
hundred times too short to be bored? You would have to believe in eternal
life in order to . . .


You will have to forgive me for having discovered that all moral philosophy
so far has been boring and should be classiﬁed as a soporiﬁc – and that
nothing has done more to spoil “virtue” for my ears than this tediousness
of its advocates; although I would not want to underestimate their general
utility. It is quite important that as few people as possible think about
morality – consequently, it is really quite important for morality not to
somehow turn interesting one of these days! But there is no need to worry!


“We strive for the forbidden” from Ovid’s Amores, III, , .



Our virtues
Things today are the same as they have always been: I don’t see anyone
in Europe who has (or conveys) any idea that moral deliberation could
be dangerous, insidious, seductive – that it could be disastrous! Just look
at the indefatigable, unavoidable English utilitarians, for example, how
awkwardly and honorably they walk in Bentham’s footsteps, wandering
to, wandering fro (a Homeric simile says it better), just as he himself had
walked in the footsteps of the honorable Helvétius (no, this was not a
dangerous man, this Helvétius!). No new thoughts, no sign of any subtle
change or fold in an old thought, not even a real history of the earlier
thought: an impossible literature on the whole, unless you know how to
sour it with some malice. That old English vice called cant, which is
a piece of moral tartufferie, has insinuated itself into these moralists too
(who have to be read with ulterior motives, if they have to be read at
all –), hidden this time under a new form: science. And there is no lack
of secret defenses against all the bites of conscience that will afﬂict a race
of former Puritans whenever they deal with morality on a scientiﬁc level.
(Isn’t a moralist the opposite of a Puritan? A thinker, that is, who treats
morality as something questionable, question-mark-able, in short, as a
problem? Shouldn’t moralists be – immoral?) Ultimately, they all want
English morality to be given its dues: since it is best for humanity, for the
“general utility” or “the happiness of the majority” – no! the happiness
of England. They want, with all the strength they can muster, to prove to
themselves that striving for English happiness, I mean for comfort and
fashion (and, at the highest level, for a seat in Parliament), is the proper
path to virtue as well, and, in fact, that whatever virtue has existed in
the world so far has involved just this sort of striving. Not one of these
clumsy, conscience-stricken herd animals (who set out to treat egoism as
a matter of general welfare –) wants to know or smell anything of the
fact that “general welfare” is no ideal, no goal, not a concept that can
somehow be grasped, but only an emetic; – that what is right for someone
absolutely cannot be right for someone else; that the requirement that
there be a single morality for everyone is harmful precisely to the higher
men; in short, that there is an order of rank between people, and between
moralities as well. They are a modest and thoroughly mediocre type of
person, these utilitarian Englishmen, but, as I have said: to the extent


Nietzsche uses the English word.



Nietzsche uses the English words “comfort” and “fashion.”



Beyond Good and Evil
that they are boring, we cannot think highly enough of their utility.
They should even be encouraged: as the following rhymes try, in part,
to do.
Good barrow pushers, we salute you,
“More is best” will always suit you,
Always stiff in head and knee,
Lacking spirit, humor too,
Mediocre through and through,
Sans genie et sans esprit!


Mature epochs that have the right to be proud of their humanity are still
so full of fear, so full of superstitious fear of the “cruel and wild beast”
(although the pride these more humane ages feel is actually caused by
their mastery of this beast), that even obvious truths remain unspoken
for centuries, as if by agreement, because they have the appearance of
helping bring the wild beast back to life after it had ﬁnally been killed
off. Perhaps I am taking a risk in allowing a truth like this to escape: let
other people recapture it and make it drink the “milk of pious reﬂection”
until it lies quiet and forgotten in its old corner. – People should rethink
their ideas about cruelty and open up their eyes; they should ﬁnally learn
impatience, so that big, fat, presumptuous mistakes like this will stop
wandering virtuously and audaciously about. An example of this is the
mistaken ideas about tragedy that have been nurtured by both ancient
and modern philosophers. This is my claim: almost everything we call
“higher culture” is based on the spiritualization and deepening of cruelty.
The “wild animal” has not been killed off at all; it is alive and well, it
has just – become divine. Cruelty is what constitutes the painful sensuality of tragedy. And what pleases us in so-called tragic pity as well as in
everything sublime, up to the highest and most delicate of metaphysical
tremblings, derives its sweetness exclusively from the intervening component of cruelty. Consider the Roman in the arena, Christ in the rapture
of the cross, the Spaniard at the sight of the stake or the bullﬁght, the
present-day Japanese ﬂocking to tragedies, the Parisian suburban laborer
who is homesick for bloody revolutions, the Wagnerienne who unfastens


“Without genius and without spirit.”



Our virtues
her will and lets Tristan und Isolde “wash over her” – what they all enjoy
and crave with a mysterious thirst to pour down their throats is “cruelty,”
the spiced drink of the great Circe. We clearly need to drive out the silly
psychology of the past; the only thing this psychology was able to teach
about cruelty was that it originated from the sight of another’s suffering.
But there is abundant, overabundant pleasure in your own suffering too,
in making yourself suffer, – and wherever anyone lets himself be talked
into self-denial in the religious sense, or self-mutilation (as the Phoenicians
or ascetics did), or into desensitization, disembowelment or remorse in
general, or into puritanical penitential spasms, vivisections of conscience
or a Pascalian sacriﬁzio dell’intelletto – wherever this is the case, he is
secretly being tempted and urged on by his cruelty, by that dangerous
thrill of self-directed cruelty. Finally, people should bear in mind that
even the knower, by forcing his spirit to know against its own inclination and, often enough, against the wishes of his heart (in other words,
to say “no” when he would like to afﬁrm, love, worship), this knower
will prevail as an artist of cruelty and the agent of its transﬁguration.
Even treating something in a profound or thorough manner is a violation,
a wanting-to-hurt the fundamental will of the spirit, which constantly
tends towards semblances and surfaces, – there is a drop of cruelty even
in every wanting-to-know.


Perhaps people will not immediately understand what I have said here
about a “fundamental will of the spirit”: let me explain. – The commanding element (whatever it is) that is generally called “spirit” wants to
dominate itself and its surroundings, and to feel its domination: it wills
simplicity out of multiplicity, it is a binding, subduing, domineering, and
truly masterful will. Its needs and abilities are the same ones that physiologists have established for everything that lives, grows, and propagates.
The power of spirit to appropriate foreign elements manifests itself in a
strong tendency to assimilate the new to the old, to simplify the manifold,
to disregard or push aside utter inconsistencies: just as it will arbitrarily
select certain aspects or outlines of the foreign, of any piece of the “external
world,” for stronger emphasis, stress, or falsiﬁcation in its own interest. Its


Sacriﬁce of the intellect.



Beyond Good and Evil
intention here is to incorporate new “experiences,” to classify new things
into old classes, – which is to say: it aims at growth, or, more particularly,
the feeling of growth, the feeling of increasing strength. This same will
is served by an apparently opposite drive of spirit, a suddenly emerging
resolution in favor of ignorance and arbitrary termination, a closing of its
windows, an inner nay-saying to something or other, a come-no-closer, a
type of defensive state against many knowable things, a contentment with
darkness, with closing horizons, a yea-saying and approval of ignorance:
all of which are necessary in proportion to the degree of its appropriating
force, its “digestive force,” to speak metaphorically – and really, “spirit”
resembles a stomach more than anything. The spirit’s occasional will to be
deceived belongs here too, perhaps with a playful hunch that things are not
one way or the other, that people just accept things as one way or the other,
a sense of pleasure in every uncertainty and ambiguity, a joyful self-delight
at the arbitrary narrowness and secrecy of a corner, at the all-too-close,
the foreground, at things made bigger, smaller, later, better, a self-delight
at the sheer caprice in all these expressions of power. Finally, the spirit’s
not quite harmless willingness to deceive other spirits and to act a part in
front of them belongs here too, that constant stress and strain of a creative,
productive, mutable force. What the spirit enjoys here is its multiplicity
of masks and its artfulness, and it also enjoys the feeling of security these
provide, – after all, its Protean arts are the very things that protect and
conceal it the best! – This will to appearances, to simpliﬁcation, to masks,
to cloaks, in short, to surfaces – since every surface is a cloak – meets
resistance from that sublime tendency of the knower, who treats and wants
to treat things in a profound, multiple, thorough manner. This is a type of
cruelty on the part of the intellectual conscience and taste, and one that
any brave thinker will acknowledge in himself, assuming that he has spent
as long as he should in hardening and sharpening his eye for himself, and
that he is used to strict discipline as well as strict words. He will say “There
is something cruel in the tendency of my spirit”: – just let kind and virtuous people try to talk him out of it! In fact, it would sound more polite
if, instead of cruelty, people were to accuse, mutter about and praise us as
having a sort of “wild honesty” – free, very free spirits that we are: – and
perhaps this is what our reputation will really be – posthumously? In the
meantime – because this won’t be happening for a while – we are the least
likely to dress ourselves up with these sorts of moral baubles and beads:
all the work we have done so far has spoiled our taste for precisely this sort


Our virtues
of bright opulence. These are beautiful, twinkling, tinkling, festive words:
genuine honesty, love of truth, love of wisdom, sacriﬁce for knowledge, the
heroism of truthfulness, – there is something about them that makes you
swell with pride. But we hermits and marmots, we convinced ourselves
a long time ago and in all the secrecy of a hermit’s conscience that even
this digniﬁed verbal pageantry belongs among the false old ﬁnery, debris,
and gold dust of unconscious human vanity, and that the terrible basic
text of homo natura must be recognized even underneath these fawning
colors and painted surfaces. To translate humanity back into nature; to
gain control of the many vain and fanciful interpretations and incidental
meanings that have been scribbled and drawn over that eternal basic text
of homo natura so far; to make sure that, from now on, the human being
will stand before the human being, just as he already stands before the rest
of nature today, hardened by the discipline of science, – with courageous
Oedipus eyes and sealed up Odysseus ears, deaf to the lures of the old
metaphysical bird catchers who have been whistling to him for far too
long: “You are more! You are higher! You have a different origin!” – This
may be a strange and insane task, but it is a task – who would deny it!
Why do we choose it, this insane task? Or to ask it differently: “Why
knowledge at all?” – Everyone will be asking us this. And we who have
been prodded so much, we who have asked ourselves the same question a
hundred times already, we have not found and are not ﬁnding any better
answers . . .


Learning transforms us, it acts like all other forms of nourishment that do
not just “preserve” –: as physiologists know. But at our foundation, “at the
very bottom,” there is clearly something that will not learn, a brick wall
of spiritual fatum, of predetermined decisions and answers to selected,
predetermined questions. In any cardinal problem, an immutable “that is
me” speaks up. When it comes to men and women, for instance, a thinker
cannot change his views but only reinforce them, only ﬁnish discovering
what, to his mind, “is established.” In time, certain solutions are found
to problems that inspire our strong beliefs in particular; perhaps they will


Natural man.



Fate.



Beyond Good and Evil
start to be called “convictions.” Later – they come to be seen as only
footsteps to self-knowledge, signposts to the problems that we are, – or,
more accurately, to the great stupidity that we are, to our spiritual fatum,
to that thing “at the very bottom” that will not learn. – On account of
the abundant civility that I have just extended to myself, I will perhaps
be more readily allowed to pronounce a few truths about the “woman
an sich”: assuming that people now know from the outset the extent to
which these are only – my truths. –


Women want to become independent, so they are beginning to enlighten
men about the “woman an sich” – this is one of the worst developments
in Europe’s general trend towards increasing ugliness. Just imagine what
these clumsy attempts at female scientiﬁcity and self-disclosure will bring
to light! Women have so much cause for shame; they contain so much that
is pedantic, superﬁcial, and schoolmarmish as well as narrowmindedly
arrogant, presumptuous, and lacking in restraint (just think about their
interactions with children!), all of which has been most successfully restrained and kept under control by their fear of men. Look out when the
“eternal tedium of woman” (which they all have in abundance!) ﬁrst dares
to emerge! When, on principle, they start completely forgetting their discretion and their art – of grace, play, chasing-all-cares-away, of making
things easier and taking them lightly, as well as their subtle skill at pleasant desires! Even now, female voices are becoming heard which – holy
Aristophanes! – are terrifying, and threaten with medicinal clarity what,
in the ﬁrst and last instance, women want from men. Isn’t it in the very
worst taste when women prepare to be scientiﬁc like this? Fortunately,
enlightenment had been a man’s business, a man’s talent until now – as
such, we could remain “among ourselves.” And with respect to everything
that women write about “woman,” we can ultimately reserve a healthy
doubt as to whether women really want – and are able to want – to provide
enlightenment about themselves . . . If this is not really all about some
woman trying to ﬁnd a new piece of ﬁnery for herself (and isn’t dressing
up a part of the Eternal Feminine?), well then, she wants to inspire fear of


In German: das “Weib an sich.” The term “an sich” means “in itself,” as in Kant’s Ding an sich
(thing in itself). I have left the term in German because any English rendering is clumsy, and the
German retains both the gender neutrality and the philosophical connotations of the term.



Our virtues
herself: – perhaps in order to dominate. But she does not want truth: what
does truth matter for a woman! Nothing is so utterly foreign, unfavorable,
hostile for women from the very start than truth, – their great art is in lying, their highest concern is appearance and beauty. Let us admit that we
men love and honor precisely this art and this instinct in women: we have
a rough time of it, and gladly seek relief by attaching ourselves to a being
in whose hands, eyes, and gentle stupidities our seriousness, our gravity,
and profundity look almost stupid to us. Finally, I will pose the question:
has a woman herself ever acknowledged a female mind as profound or a
female heart as just? And isn’t it true that, judging overall, “woman” has
historically been most despised by women themselves – and not by us at
all? – We men wish that women would stop compromising themselves
through enlightenment: just as male care and protection of women were
at work when the church decreed: mulier taceat in ecclesia! It was for
women’s own good, when Napoleon gave the all-too-eloquent Madame
de Staël to understand: mulier taceat in politicis! – and I think that it is a
true friend of the ladies who calls to them today: mulier taceat de muliere!


It shows corruption of the instincts – even apart from the fact that it
shows bad taste – when a woman refers speciﬁcally to Madame Roland or
Madame de Staël or Monsieur Georges Sand, as if that proved something
in favor of the “woman an sich.” Men consider these the three comical
women an sich – nothing else! – and precisely the best involuntary counterarguments against emancipation and female self-determination.


Stupidity in the kitchen; woman as cook; the spine-chilling thoughtlessness in the feeding of the family and the head of the house! Women do
not understand what food means: and yet want to cook! If woman were a
thoughtful creature, then the fact that she has been the cook for thousands
of years would surely have led her to discover the greatest physiological
facts, and at the same time make the art of medicine her own! Bad cooking


“Woman should be silent in church.”



“Woman should be silent about politics.”



“Woman should be silent about woman.”



Beyond Good and Evil
and the complete absence of reason in the kitchen have caused the longest
delays and the worst damage to the development of humanity: even today,
things are hardly any better. A speech for young ladies.


There are phrases and masterstrokes of the spirit, there are aphorisms,
a small handful of words, in which an entire culture, an entire society is
suddenly crystallized. Madame de Lambert’s occasional remark to her
son is one of them: “Mon ami, ne vous permettez jamais que de folies qui
vous feront grand plaisir”: – which, by the way, is the most motherly and
astute remark that has ever been addressed to a son.


What Dante and Goethe believed about women – the former when he
sang “ella guardava suso, ed io in lei,” the latter when he translated it as
“the Eternal Feminine draws us upward ” –: I have no doubt that any
noble woman will object to this belief, since this is just what she believes
about the Eternal Masculine.


Seven little maxims about women
Suddenly we’re bored no more when a man crawls through the door!
∗ ∗
Age, alas! and science too gives weaker virtues strength anew.
∗ ∗
Black gowns and a silent guise make any woman look quite – wise.
∗ ∗
Who to thank for my success? God – and my own tailoress.
∗ ∗


“My friend, only allow yourself the follies that will give you great pleasure.”



“She looked up, and I at her.” From Dante’s Divina Commedia: Paradiso, II, .



From Goethe’s Faust II, line f.



Our virtues
In youth: a ﬂower-covered lair. In age: a dragon stirs in there.
∗ ∗
His name is good, his ﬁgure’s ﬁne, a man as well – if only mine!
∗ ∗
When words are few but always sound – a she-mule walks on dangerous
ground!


So far, men have been treating women like birds that have lost their way
and ﬂown down to them from some height or another: like something
ﬁner, more vulnerable, wilder, stranger, sweeter, more soulful, – but also
like something that has to be locked up to keep it from ﬂying away.


To be wrong about the fundamental problem of “man and woman”; on
the one hand, to deny the most abysmal antagonism and the necessity
of an eternally hostile tension; and, on the other hand, to dream, perhaps, of equal rights, equal education, equal entitlements and obligations:
that is a typical sign of a shallow mind, and a thinker who has proven to
be shallow in this dangerous area – shallow in instinct! –, can be generally regarded as suspicious, or, even more, as shown up for what he
is, as exposed. He will probably be too “short” for all the fundamental questions of life, including future life, and unable to get down to
them in any depth. On the other hand, someone who has the same depth
in his spirit as he does in his desires, and also that depth of goodwill
which is capable of harshness and strictness and is easily mistaken for
them – that sort of man will only ever be able to think about woman in
an oriental manner. He needs to understand the woman as a possession,
as property that can be locked up, as something predestined for servitude
and fulﬁlled by it. In this he has to adopt the position of Asia’s enormous rationality, Asia’s superiority of instinct, just as the Greeks once
did (being Asia’s best heirs and students); we know that, from Homer
up to the times of Pericles, while their culture was growing and their
strength expanding, the Greeks were gradually becoming stricter with
women too – in short, more oriental. How necessary, how logical – in


Beyond Good and Evil
fact, how humanly desirable all this has been: just think about it for a
while!


The men of our epoch treat the weaker sex with more respect than any
epoch has ever done – this is part of the democratic tendency and fundamental taste, as is a lack of respect for age –: is it any wonder that
this respect is immediately misused? People want more, people learn to
make demands, people ultimately ﬁnd this respect tax almost hurtful,
people would prefer to compete for rights or, in all seriousness, wage war:
enough, woman loses her shame. Let us immediately add that she also
loses her taste. She forgets her fear of man: but the woman who “forgets
fear” abandons her most feminine instincts. It is fair enough and also
understandable enough for women to dare to emerge when fear of men
is no longer inculcated, or, to be more exact, when the man in men is
no longer wanted and cultivated; what is more difﬁcult to understand is
that in the process – women degenerate. This is happening today, make
no mistake about it! Wherever the industrial spirit has won out over the
military and aristocratic spirit, women are now striving for the economic
and legal independence of a clerk: “the woman as clerk” is written on the
gateway to the developing, modern society. While women are seizing new
rights in this manner, trying to become “master” and writing “progress”
for women on their ﬂags and pennants, the opposite is taking place with
terrifying clarity: woman are regressing. Ever since the French Revolution,
the inﬂuence of women in Europe has decreased proportionately as they
have gained rights and entitlements. Accordingly, the “emancipation of
women,” to the extent that it has been demanded and called for by women
themselves (and not just by shallow-minded masculine dolts), turns out
to be a strange symptom of the increased weakening and softening of the
most feminine instincts of all. The stupidity in this movement, an almost
masculine stupidity, is enough to make any woman who has turned out
well (which always means a clever woman) thoroughly ashamed. To lose
your sense for which ground best insures your victory; to neglect practice of your own military arts; to lose control of yourself in front of men,
perhaps even “to the point of writing books,” where you used to act with
discipline and subtle, cunning humility; to work with virtuous courage
against men’s belief in any veiled, fundamentally different ideal in women,


Our virtues
in any sort of Eternal or Necessary Feminine; to dissuade men, emphatically and at length, from thinking that women must by kept, cared for,
protected, and looked after like gentle, strangely wild and often pleasant
house pets; to collect together, in an inept and indignant manner, everything slavish and serﬂike that was and still is intrinsic to the position of
women in the present social order (as if slavery were a counter-argument
and not rather a condition of any higher culture, any elevation of culture): – what does all this mean except a crumbling away of feminine
instincts, a defeminization? Of course, there are plenty of idiotic friends
and corrupters of women among the scholarly asses of the male sex who
recommend that women defeminize themselves like this and copy all the
stupidities that the “man” in Europe, that European “manliness” suffers
from, – who would like to bring women down to the level of “general
education,” and maybe even of reading the newspapers and taking part
in politics. Every now and then, people even want to make free spirits
and literati out of women: as if a woman without piety were anything
other than absolutely repugnant or ludicrous to a profound and godless
man –. Almost everywhere, women’s nerves are being ruined by the most
pathological and dangerous of all types of music (our most recent German
music) and women are being made more hysterical by the day, and less
capable of performing their ﬁrst and last profession, the bearing of strong
children. People want women to be more “cultivated” in general and want,
as they say, to make the “weaker sex” strong through culture: as if history
did not teach as vividly as possible that “cultivating” human beings and
weakening – in particular, weakening, dissipating, afﬂicting the strength
of the will – have always kept pace with each other, and that the most
powerful and inﬂuential women in the world (recently even Napoleon’s
mother) owed their power and their dominance over men precisely to the
strength of their will – and not to schoolteachers! What inspires respect
and, often enough, fear of women is their nature (which is “more natural” than that of men), their truly predatory and cunning agility, their
tiger’s claws inside their glove, the naiveté of their egoism, their inner
wildness and inability to be trained, the incomprehensibility, expanse,
and rambling character of their desires and virtues . . . What inspires pity,
in spite of all the fear, for this dangerous and beautiful cat “woman” is
that she seems to suffer more, be more vulnerable, need more love, and
be condemned to more disappointments than any animal. Fear and pity:
these are the feelings with which men have stood before women so far,


Beyond Good and Evil
always with one foot in tragedy which tears you apart even as it delights
you –. What? And that brings it to an end? The demystiﬁcation of women
is in progress? Women’s tediousness comes slowly into view? Oh Europe,
Europe! We are familiar with the horned animal that you always found
the most attractive, who kept threatening you with more danger! Your
old fable could become “history” once more, – once more an enormous
stupidity could come to dominate you and carry you away! And there is
no god hidden inside, no! only an “idea,” a “modern idea”! . . .


An allusion to the Greek myth in which Zeus, in the form of a bull, abducts Europa, daughter of
the royal house of Phoenicia.



Part  Peoples and fatherlands

I heard it again for the ﬁrst time – Richard Wagner’s overture to Meistersinger: it is magniﬁcent, ornate, heavy, late art that takes pride in
presupposing two hundred years of music as still living in order to be
comprehensible: – it is a credit to the Germans that this sort of pride
is not mistaken! What strengths and life forces, what seasons and territories are not combined here! One moment the work will strike us as
old-fashioned, and the next as alien, harsh, and overly young. It is just
as capricious as it is pompously conventional, it is not infrequently mischievous, and more often coarse and uncouth – it has ﬁre and courage
and at the same time the loose, drab skin of fruit that ripens too late. It
ﬂows in a full and expansive manner: and then suddenly a moment of inexplicable hesitation, like a gap that springs up between cause and effect,
a dream-inducing pressure, practically a nightmare – , but, even then, the
old stream of contentment spreads far and wide once again, that stream
of the most varied contentment, of fortunes old and new which very much
include the artist’s happiness with himself (a happiness he does not want
to hide), his astonished, joyful part in knowing he has mastered the devices he employs here – new, newly acquired, untried artistic devices, as
he seems to reveal to us. All told, no beauty, nothing of the south, none of
the ﬁne, southern, brilliant skies, no gracefulness or dance, barely a will to
logic; a certain awkwardness, in fact, which is even emphasized, as if the
artist wanted to tell us: “I meant to do that”; an unwieldy guise, something capriciously barbaric and solemn, a ﬂurry of erudite and venerable
delicacies and lace; something German in the best and the worst senses


Beyond Good and Evil
of the word, something multiple, informal and inexhaustible in a German
way; a certain German powerfulness and overfullness of the soul that is
not afraid to hide behind the reﬁnements of decline (and perhaps this
is where it feels best); a fair and ﬁtting emblem of the German soul that
is simultaneously young and obsolete, over-done and still overﬂowing with
future. This type of music best expresses what I think about the Germans:
they are from the day before yesterday and the day after tomorrow, – they
still have no today.


We “good Europeans”: even we have hours when we allow ourselves a
robust fatherlandishness, a slip and backslide into old loves and conﬁnes
(I have just given a sample of this), hours of national outbursts, patriotic
trepidations, and all sorts of other antiquated ﬂoods of affect. But things
that run their course in us in a matter of hours might take clumsier spirits
longer periods of time to get over, a good half a year in some cases and half
a lifetime in others, according to the speed and strength of their digestion
and metabolism. In fact, I could imagine dull and hesitant races who would
need half a century even in our speedy Europe to overcome such atavistic
ﬁts of fatherlandishness, to unglue themselves from the soil and return
to reason, by which I mean “good Europeanism.” And while digressing
on this possibility, it so happens that I’m becoming an ear-witness to a
conversation between two old “patriots,” both obviously hard of hearing,
and so speaking that much louder. “He thinks and knows as much about
philosophy as a peasant or a fraternity student,” said the one –: “He’s still
innocent. But who cares these days? This is the age of the masses: they lie
prostrate in front of anything massive. And the same in politicis too. They
call a statesman ‘great’ if he builds them a new tower of Babel or some sort
of monstrosity of empire and power – who cares if we are more cautious
and circumspect and keep holding on to our old belief that it takes a great
thought to make a cause or action great. Suppose that a statesman puts
his people in the position of needing to do ‘great politics’ in the future,
although they are ill equipped and ill prepared by nature for this task, so
that they need to sacriﬁce their old and reliable virtues for the sake of a
new and dubious mediocrity, – suppose that such a statesman condemns
his people to any ‘political activity’ at all, when in fact they have had better
things to do and to think about until now, and at the bottom of their souls


Peoples and fatherlands
they hadn’t got rid of a cautious disgust at the agitation, emptiness, and
riotous brawling of truly politicized peoples: – suppose that a statesman
like this incites the dormant passions and greed of his people, makes a
ﬂaw out of their former shyness and the way they enjoyed staying to
the side, makes a fault out of their cosmopolitanism and secret inﬁnity,
devalues their most heart-felt tendencies, turns their conscience around,
makes their spirit narrow and their taste ‘national,’ – what! A statesman
who would do all that, whose people would have to serve him like a prison
sentence for all the future (if they even had a future); this sort of a statesman
is great?” “Without a doubt!” answered the other old patriot vehemently,
“Otherwise he wouldn’t have been able to do it! Perhaps it was crazy to
want something like this? But perhaps everything great started out as
simply crazy!” – “That’s an abuse of language!” shouted the ﬁrst speaker
in reply: “– strong! strong! strong and crazy! Not great!” – The old men
had grown visibly heated as they yelled their “truths” into each other’s
faces like this; but me, in my happiness and my beyond, I considered how
soon the strong come to be dominated by the stronger; and also that the
spiritual leveling of one people is compensated for in the deepening of
another. –


Whatever term is used these days to try to mark what is distinctive
about the European, whether it is “civilization” or “humanization” or
“progress” (or whether, without implying praise or censure, it is simply
labeled Europe’s democratic movement); behind all the moral and political
foregrounds that are indicated by formulas like these, an immense physiological process is taking place and constantly gaining ground – the process
of increasing similarity between Europeans, their growing detachment
from the conditions under which climate- or class-bound races originate, their increasing independence from that determinate milieu where
for centuries the same demands would be inscribed on the soul and the
body – and so the slow approach of an essentially supra-national and
nomadic type of person who, physiologically speaking, is typiﬁed by a
maximal degree of the art and force of adaptation. This process of the
European in a state of becoming can be slowed down in tempo through
large-scale relapses (although this might be the very thing that makes
it gain and grow in vehemence and depth). The still-raging storm and


Beyond Good and Evil
stress of “national feeling” belongs here, as does the anarchism that is only
just approaching. This process will probably end up with results that its
naive supporters and eulogists, the apostles of “modern ideas,” have least
expected. The same new conditions that generally lead to a leveling and
mediocritization of man – a useful, industrious, abundantly serviceable,
and able herd animal man – are to the highest degree suitable for giving
rise to exceptional people who possess the most dangerous and attractive
qualities. Considering the fact that every adaptive force which systematically tests an ever-changing set of conditions (starting over with each
generation, practically with each decade) does not make the powerfulness
of the type even remotely possible; considering the fact that the overall impression of such future Europeans will probably be of exceedingly
garrulous, impotent and eminently employable workers who need masters
and commanders like they need their daily bread; and, ﬁnally, considering
the fact that Europe’s democratization amounts to the creation of a type
prepared for slavery in the most subtle sense: taking all this into account,
the strong person will need, in particular and exceptional cases, to get
stronger and richer than he has perhaps ever been so far, – thanks to a lack
of prejudice in his schooling, thanks to an enormous diversity in practice,
art, and masks. What I’m trying to say is: the democratization of Europe
is at the same time an involuntary exercise in the breeding of tyrants –
understanding that word in every sense, including the most spiritual.


I’m glad to hear that our sun is moving rapidly towards the constellation
of Hercules, and I hope that the people of this earth will act like the sun.
With us in front, we good Europeans! –


There was a time when it was customary to call the Germans “profound,” as a term of distinction. Now that the most successful type of new
Germanism desires a completely different sort of honor and has, perhaps,
come to regret the absence of a certain “elan” in everything profound, it
is almost timely and patriotic to ask whether people have not been fooling themselves with this praise; in short, whether German profundity
is not something fundamentally different and worse – and something we


Peoples and fatherlands
are about to get rid of, thank God. So: to try to change our ideas about
German profundity, all we need is a little vivisection of the German soul. –
More than anything else, the German soul is multiple, it originates in different places and is more piled up and pieced together than actually constructed: this is due to its origin. A German with the audacity to claim “two
souls, alas, are dwelling in my breast” would be abusing the truth quite
badly, or to be more accurate, would fall quite a few souls short of the truth.
As a people composed of the most enormous assortment and combination
of races (perhaps even with a preponderance of the pre-Aryan element), as
a “people of the middle” in every sense, the Germans are more incomprehensible, comprehensive, contradictory, unfamiliar, unpredictable, surprising, and even frightening than other peoples are to themselves: – they
escape deﬁnition which by itself makes them the despair of the French. It is
characteristic of the Germans that the question “what is German?” never
dies out with them. Kotzebue certainly knew his Germans well enough:
“We are known” they called out to him in joy, – but Sand claimed to know
them too. Jean Paul knew what he was doing when he came out furiously
against Fichte’s dishonest but patriotic ﬂattery and exaggerations – but
Goethe probably felt differently from Jean Paul about the Germans, even
though he thought Jean Paul was right about Fichte. What did Goethe really think about the Germans? – But Goethe never did speak plainly about
many of the things around him, and was an expert at subtle silence all his
life: – he probably had his reasons. It is clear that the “Wars of Liberation”
did not raise his level of enthusiasm any more than the French Revolution
had done; the event that made him rethink his Faust – and indeed the
whole problem of “man” – was the appearance of Napoleon. There are
sayings where Goethe speaks as if from abroad, disputing with impatient
hardness just what Germans take pride in. He once deﬁned the famous
German Gemüt  as “tolerance towards others’ weaknesses as well as your
own.” Was he wrong? It is characteristic of the Germans that people are
rarely completely wrong about them. The German soul has passages going this way and that, it has caves, hiding places and dungeons; its disorder
has much of the charm of the mysterious; the German is an expert on




Goethe’s Faust I, line .
Reference to Jean Paul’s review of Fichte’s Reden an die Deutsche Nation (Speeches to the German
Nation), in Heidelberger Jahrbücher ().
This term is difﬁcult to translate, but suggests a soulful quality or warm-hearted disposition.



Beyond Good and Evil
the secret paths to chaos. And just as everything loves its likeness, the
German loves clouds and everything unclear, becoming, nebulous, damp
and overcast: he feels that uncertainty, disorganization, displacement,
and growth of every type are “profound.” The German himself is not,
he becomes, he “develops.” “Development,” then, is the truly German
discovery and sensation in the great realm of philosophical formulas: – a
governing concept that, in conjunction with German beer and German
music, is working to Germanize all of Europe. Foreigners stand amazed
and enthralled before the riddles posed to them by the contradictory nature at the base of the German soul (which Hegel brought into a system
and Richard Wagner ﬁnally set to music). “Good-natured and spiteful” –
a juxtaposition like this, which would be absurd in reference to any other
people, is all too often justiﬁed in Germany (unfortunately: just live with
Swabians for a while!). The ponderousness of German scholars, their
social fatuousness, is frighteningly consistent with an inner high-wire act
and easy boldness in the face of which all gods have learned fear by now.
If you want a demonstration of the German soul ad oculos, just look at
German taste, German arts and customs: what a boorish indifference to
“taste”! How the noblest stands right next to the most base! How disorderly and rich this whole psychic economy really is! The German lugs
his soul around, he lugs around everything he experiences. He digests his
events badly, he is never “ﬁnished” with them; German profundity is often
just a weak and sluggish “digestion.” And just as everyone who is chronically ill (all dyspeptics) tends toward comfortable things, the Germans
love “openness” and everything “upright.” How comfortable it is to be
open and upright! Today, the Germans are expert at what is perhaps the
happiest and most dangerous disguise, that trusting, accommodating, allcards-on-the-table attitude of genuine German honesty: this is their truly
Mephistophelean art, and with it they can “still go far”! The German
lets himself go, looks out with true, blue, empty German eyes, – and foreigners immediately mistake him for his nightshirt! – What I am trying
to say is: let “German profundity” be what it will (and just between us,
perhaps, we will allow ourselves a laugh at its expense?), we would do
well to honor its appearance and good name in the future as well, and


Before the eyes.



In German: Biederkeit.



From Goethe’s Faust part I, line .



Peoples and fatherlands
not to trade in our old reputation as people of profundity too cheaply for
Prussian “elan” or Berliner wit and sand. It is clever of a people to pass
themselves off – to let themselves pass – for profound, undiplomatic, goodnatured, honest and un-clever: it could even be – profound! Finally: people
should live up to their name, – and it’s not for nothing that the Germans
[die Deutsche] are called the “tiusche” people, the “Täusche” (deceptive)
people . . .


The “good old days” are over – they sang themselves out in Mozart.
How lucky for us that his Rococo still speaks to us, that his “good company,” his tender enthusiasms, his childish pleasure in Chinoiserie and
fancy ﬂourishes, his courtesy of the heart, his longing for the delicate and
the amorous, for dancing and tearful moments of bliss, his faith in the
south, might still appeal to some vestige in us! Oh, some day all this will be
gone! – but who can doubt that the understanding and taste for Beethoven
will be gone even sooner! – although he was only the ﬁnale of a transitional style and stylistic discontinuity and not, like Mozart, the ﬁnale of a
centuries-old, great European taste. Beethoven falls somewhere between
a brittle old soul that is constantly coming apart and an overly young,
future-oriented soul that is constantly on its way. A dusk of eternal loss
and eternal, wild hope lies over his music – the same light that lay across
Europe when it dreamed with Rousseau, danced around the freedom tree
of the Revolution and ended up practically worshipping Napoleon. But
how quickly this very feeling is now fading, how difﬁcult it is to even know
about this feeling these days – how foreign the language of this Rousseau,
Schiller, Shelley, and Byron sounds to our ear, these men in whom, collectively, the same European destiny which in Beethoven knew how to sing,
found its way into words! – What became of German music afterwards
belongs in romanticism, which is to say in a movement that was (calculated historically), even briefer, more ﬂeeting and more superﬁcial than
that great entr’acte, that European transition from Rousseau to Napoleon
and the rise of democracy. Weber: but what are Freischütz and Oberon to us
these days! Or Marschner’s Hans Heiling and Vampyr! Or even Wagner’s
Tannhäuser! This music is gone, if not yet forgotten. At any rate, the
whole music of romanticism was not noble enough, not music enough to
have rights anywhere except in the theater and in front of crowds; it was


Beyond Good and Evil
second-rate music from the very start, and real musicians took little notice
of it. Things were different with Felix Mendelssohn, that halcyon master
who, thanks to his easier, purer, happier soul, was quickly honored and
just as quickly forgotten, as a lovely incident in German music. But when
it comes to Robert Schumann, who took things seriously and was from
the start taken seriously himself (he is the last to have founded a school):
don’t we think of it today as a stroke of luck, a relief, a liberation that
just this Schumannian romanticism has been overcome? Schumann, ﬂeeing into the “Saxon Switzerland” of his soul, half Werther-ish, half Jean
Paul-ine by nature, certainly not Beethoven-esque! certainly not Byronic!
His Manfred music is a mistake and a misunderstanding to the point of
injustice –; Schumann with his taste, which was fundamentally a small
taste (being a dangerous tendency towards calm lyricism and a drunkenness of feeling, which is twice as dangerous among Germans), going
constantly to the side, timidly excusing himself and retreating, a noble,
tender creature, who reveled in nothing but anonymous happiness and
pain, a type of little girl and noli me tangere from the start: this Schumann
was already a merely German event in music, no longer a European event
like Beethoven, or, to a still more comprehensive extent, like Mozart.
With Schumann, German music was threatened with its greatest danger, that of losing the voice of the European soul and descending to a mere
fatherlandishness. –


– What torture German books are for anyone with a third ear! How reluctantly he stands by the slowly revolving quagmire of toneless tones
and rhythms without dance that the Germans call a “book”! And the
Germans who read books! How lazily, how grudgingly, how badly they
read! How many Germans know (and require themselves to know) that
there is art in every good sentence! Art that wants to be discerned to the
extent that the sentence wants to be understood! A misunderstanding
about its tempo, for instance, and the sentence itself is misunderstood! To
have no doubts as to the rhythmically decisive syllables, to feel breaks in
the most stringent of symmetries as deliberate and attractive, to extend
a subtle and patient ear to every staccato and every rubato, guessing the


Do not touch me.



Peoples and fatherlands
meaning of the order of vowels and diphthongs and how tenderly and
richly they can change color and change it again when put next to each
other – who among book-reading Germans is well-meaning enough to
acknowledge duties and demands like these and to listen for so much art
and intent in language? In the end, people just do not have “the ear for
it,” and so the strongest contrasts in style go unheard and the most subtle
artistry is wasted as if on the deaf. – These were my thoughts as I noticed
two masters in the art of prose being crudely and thoughtlessly mistaken
for each other, the one whose words drip down with coldness and hesitation, as if from the roof of a damp cave (he counts on their dull sound
and resonance) and another who handles his language like a supple rapier
and, from his ﬁngers to his toes, feels the dangerous joy of the quivering,
over-sharpened sword that wants to bite, sizzle, cut. –


How little the German style has to do with tones and with ears is shown by
the fact that it is precisely our good musicians who write poorly. Germans
do not read aloud, they do not read for the ear but only with the eye, keeping their ears in a drawer in the meantime. When ancient people read, if
they read at all (it happened seldom enough), it was aloud to themselves,
and moreover in a loud voice. People were surprised by someone reading
quietly, and secretly wondered why. In a loud voice: that means with all
the swells, inﬂections, sudden changes in tone, and shifts in tempo that the
ancient, public world took pleasure in. At that time, the rules for written
style were the same as those for spoken style, and those rules depended
in part on the astonishing development and subtle requirements of the
ear and larynx, and also, in part, on the strength, endurance, and power
of the ancient lung. What the ancients meant by a period is primarily a
physiological unit insofar as it is combined in a single breath. Periods like
the ones that occur in Demosthenes and Cicero – swelling up twice and
twice sinking down and all within a single breath – those were a delight for
people of antiquity who knew from their own training to value the virtue
of the rarity and difﬁculty involved in performing periods like these. We
have no real right to the great period, we who are modern, we who are
short-winded in every sense! On the whole, these ancients were themselves dilettantes in rhetoric, and therefore authorities, and consequently
critics – this is how they drove their rhetoricians to extremes. Similarly,


Beyond Good and Evil
in the previous century, when all the men and women of Italy knew how
to sing, virtuosity in song (and with it the art of melody too –) reached a
high point. But in Germany there was (until very recently, when a sort of
grandstand verbosity shyly and awkwardly stirred its young wings) really
only one species of public and vaguely artistic rhetoric, and that came
from the pulpit. In Germany, only the preachers knew the weight of a
word or syllable, the extent to which a sentence stumbled, sprang, rang,
ran, or ran away. They were the only ones with a conscience in their ears,
which was often enough an evil conscience: because there was no shortage of reasons why a German of all people should achieve competence
in rhetoric infrequently and almost always too late. This is why the masterpiece of German prose is by all rights the masterpiece of its greatest
preacher: the Bible has been the best German book to date. Compared to
Luther’s Bible, almost everything else is merely “literature” – something
that had not grown in Germany and for that reason did not grow and is
not growing into German hearts like the Bible did.


There are two types of genius: one that fundamentally begets and wants
to beget, and another that is happy to be impregnated and give birth.
Similarly with peoples of genius, there are those who inherit the female
problem of pregnancy and the secret task of forming, ripening, and bringing to completion – the Greeks, for instance, were this type of people as
well as the French –; and others who need to impregnate and be the cause
of new orders of life, – like the Jews, the Romans, and, to pose a modest
question, the Germans? – peoples tortured and delighted by unknown
fevers who irresistibly leave themselves, loving and lusting after foreign
races (after ones who “let themselves be impregnated” –) and also domineering, like everything that knows itself to be full of creative forces and
consequently knows of “God’s grace.” These two types of genius look
for each other like men and women; but they also misunderstand each
other, – like men and women.


Every people has its own tartufferies, and calls them its virtues. You do
not know – you cannot know – what is best about yourself.


Peoples and fatherlands


What Europe owes to the Jews? Many things both good and bad, but
mainly one thing that is both best and worst: the grand style in morality, the horror and majesty of inﬁnite demands, inﬁnite meanings, the
whole romanticism and sublimity of the morally questionable – and, consequently, precisely the most appealing, insidious, and exceptional aspect
of those plays of colors and seductions to life in whose afterglow the sky of
our present European culture, its evening sky, glows away – perhaps goes
away. This is why, among the spectators and philosophers, artists like us
regard the Jews with – gratitude.


We have to accept the fact that all sorts of clouds and disturbances (basically, small ﬁts of stupefaction) drift over the spirit of a people who suffers
and wants to suffer from national nervous fevers and political ambition.
With today’s Germans, for instance, there is the anti-French stupidity
one moment and the anti-Jewish stupidity the next, now the anti-Polish
stupidity, now the Christian-Romantic, the Wagnerian, the Teutonic, the
Prussian (just look at these poor historians, these Sybels and Treitschkes
with their thickly bandaged heads –), or whatever else they might be
called, these little stupors of the German spirit and conscience. Please
forgive the fact that, during a short and risky stay in a badly infected
region, I did not completely escape this illness either, and like everyone
else started worrying about things that were none of my business: the ﬁrst
sign of political infection. About the Jews, for instance: just listen. – I
have yet to meet a German who was well disposed towards Jews. And
however unconditional the rejection of genuine anti-Semitism might be
on the part of every prudent or political person, such prudence and politics are not really aimed at anti-Semitic sentiment in general, but instead
at its dangerous excess, and especially at the outrageous and disgraceful expression of this excessive sentiment – this cannot be denied. That
Germany has ample quantities of Jews, that the German stomach and
the German blood have difﬁculty (and will continue for a long time to
have difﬁculty) coping with even this number of “Jews” – as the Italians,
the French, the British have coped, due to a stronger digestion –: this
is the clear statement and language of a universal instinct that needs to


Beyond Good and Evil
be listened to and acted on. “Don’t let in any more Jews! And lock the
doors to the east in particular (even to Austria)!” – so commands the
instinct of a people whose type is still weak and indeterminate enough
to blur easily and be easily obliterated by a stronger race. But the Jews
are without a doubt the strongest, purest, most tenacious race living in
Europe today. They know how to thrive in even the worst conditions (and
actually do better than in favorable ones) due to some virtues that people
today would like to see labeled as vices, – above all, thanks to a resolute
faith that does not need to feel ashamed in the face of “modern ideas.”
The Jews change, if they change, only in the way the Russian empire
makes its conquests (being an empire that has time and was not made
yesterday): namely, according to the fundamental principle “as slowly as
possible!” A thinker who has Europe’s future on his conscience will, in
every sketch he draws of this future, consider the Jews, like the Russians,
to be the most certain and probable factors at present in the great play
and struggle of forces. What gets called a “nation” in Europe today (and
is really more a res facta than nata – every once in a while a res ﬁcta et
picta will look exactly the same –) is, in any case, something young, easily
changed, and in a state of becoming, not yet a race let alone the sort of aere
perennius that the Jewish type is: these “nations” should be on a careful
lookout for any hotheaded rivalry and hostility! The fact that the Jews, if
they wanted (or if they were forced, as the anti-Semites seem to want),
could already be dominant, or indeed could quite literally have control
over present-day Europe – this is established. The fact that they are not
working and making plans to this end is likewise established. Meanwhile,
what they wish and want instead, with a uniﬁed assertiveness even, is to
be absorbed and assimilated into Europe; they thirst for some place where
they can be settled, permitted, respected at last and where they can put
an end to the nomadic life, the “wandering Jew” –; and this urge and
impulse (which in itself perhaps already reveals a slackening of the Jewish
instincts) should be carefully noted and accommodated – in which case
it might be practical and appropriate to throw the anti-Semitic hooligans
out of the country. Approached selectively and with all due caution, the
way it is done by the English nobility. It would clearly be unproblematic


Res facta means “something made”; res nata means “something born.”



Something ﬁctitious and unreal.



More enduring than bronze.



Peoples and fatherlands
for the stronger and more strongly delineated types of new Germanism
(the ofﬁcers of noble rank from the Mark, for instance) to get involved
with them: and it would be very interesting to see whether the genius of
fortune and fortitude (and above all some spirit and spiritedness, which
are in very short supply in the place just mentioned –) could not be added
into, bred into, the hereditary art of commanding and obeying – both of
which are classic features of the Mark these days. But I should really break
off my cheerful speeches and hyper-Germania here, since I am already
touching on something I take seriously, on the “European problem” as I
understand it, on the breeding of a new caste to rule Europe. –


This is not a philosophical race – these Englishmen. Bacon signiﬁed an
attack on the philosophical spirit in general; Hobbes, Hume, and Locke
indicated a degradation and a depreciation in value of the concept “philosopher” for more than a century. Kant rose up and rebelled against Hume;
and it was Locke about whom Schelling was able to say “je méprise Locke.”
Hegel and Schopenhauer were of one mind (along with Goethe) in the
struggle against the English-mechanistic world-stupidiﬁcation; those two
hostile brother geniuses in philosophy who divided along the opposing
poles of the German spirit and, in the process, wronged each other as only
brothers can. That fatuous dolt, Carlyle, knew well enough what England
lacks and has always lacked; Carlyle, that half-actor and rhetorician who
tried to conceal under impassioned grimaces what he knew about himself:
namely, what he lacked – real power of intellect, real profundity of spiritual
vision, in short: philosophy. It is characteristic of an unphilosophical
race like this to ﬁrmly support Christianity: they need its discipline to be
“moralized” and in some sense humanized. It is just because the English
are gloomier, stronger-willed, more sensuous, and more brutal than the
Germans that they, as the baser of the two, are the more pious as well:
they need Christianity that much more. To subtler nostrils, even this
English Christianity bears the genuinely English odor of the very spleen
and alcoholic dissipation against which it is rightly used as a remedy, – the
subtler poison treating the cruder. In fact, a subtler poisoning is a sign of


The Mark Brandenburg, the region around Berlin.



“I despise Locke.”



Beyond Good and Evil
progress in crude peoples; it is a step towards spiritualization. The English
crudeness and peasant-like seriousness is most tolerably disguised (or
better: explained and reinterpreted) by Christian gestures, prayers, and
psalm-singing. And for that herd of drunken and dissipated cows who
in the past learned to grunt morally under the inﬂuence of Methodism
and again more recently as a “salvation army,” – for them, a penitential
spasm just might be the highest level of “humanity” that they can attain:
that much you can allow. But what is offensive in even the most humane
Englishman is his lack of music, speaking metaphorically (and without
metaphors –): there is no dance or timing in the movement of his soul and
his body, not even a desire for dance or timing, for “music.” Just listen to
him speak; just watch the most beautiful Englishwomen walk – no other
country on earth has more beautiful doves or swans, – ﬁnally, listen to
them sing! But I am asking too much . . .


There are truths best known by mediocre minds, because they are best
suited to mediocre minds; there are truths that have a charm and seductive allure only for mediocre spirits. We are coming up against this
perhaps unpleasant proposition right now, since the spirit of worthy but
mediocre Englishmen – I mean Darwin, John Stuart Mill, and Herbert
Spencer – is starting to come to prominence in the middle regions of
European taste. In fact, who would doubt the utility of having spirits
like these prevail for the time being? It would be a mistake to think that
far-ﬂying spirits of the highest type would be particularly adept at detecting, collecting, and drawing conclusions from lots of common little
facts: – rather, being exceptions, they are not well situated with respect
to the “rule.” Ultimately, they have more to do than just to know – they
have to be something new, mean something new, and present new values!
The chasm between knowing something and being able to do it is perhaps even greater and more uncanny than it is generally thought to be:
people who can do things in the grand style, the creators, might need to
be ignorant. On the other hand, when it comes to scientiﬁc discoveries of
a Darwinian type, a certain narrowness, aridity, and diligent, painstaking
care – in short, something English – is not a bad thing to have at your
disposal. – Finally, let us not forget that the English have caused a total depression of the European spirit once already with their profound


Peoples and fatherlands
ordinariness. What people call “modern ideas” or “eighteenth-century
ideas” or even “French ideas” – in other words, what the German spirit
rebelled against in profound disgust –, was English in origin, there is no
doubt about it. The French were just the apes and actors (as well as the best
soldiers) of these ideas, and unfortunately their ﬁrst and most thorough
victims too, since the âme française ended up so sparse and emaciated
from the damned Anglomania of “modern ideas” that people these days
look back at its sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, its profound impassioned strength, and its inventive nobility, with something bordering on
disbelief. But we have to hold on to this statement of historical fairness
with our teeth and defend it against the moment and appearances: the
European noblesse (of feeling, of taste, of manner – in short, taking the
word in all its higher senses) – is France’s work and invention; European
baseness, the plebeianism of modern ideas – is England’s. –


France is still the seat of the most spiritual and sophisticated culture in
Europe today, and the preeminent school of taste: but you have to know
how to ﬁnd this “France of taste.” People belonging to it keep themselves
well hidden: – there might be only a small number of people in which
it loves and lives, people who might not have the sturdiest legs to stand
on, some of them fatalists, somber and ill, some of them pampered and
over the top, people who have the ambition to hide themselves. There is
something they all have in common: they shut their ears to the raging stupidity and the noisy jabbering of the democratic bourgeoisie. In fact, it is
a coarsened and stultiﬁed France that thrashes around in the foreground
these days, – it recently celebrated a real orgy of bad taste combined with
self-admiration at Victor Hugo’s funeral. They have something else in
common too: the goodwill to ward off spiritual Germanization – and an
even better inability to do it! Perhaps Schopenhauer is more at home and
settled now in this France of the spirit (which is also a France of pessimism) than he ever was in Germany; not to mention Heinrich Heine,
who has been in the ﬂesh and blood of the subtler and more promising
lyric poets of Paris for a while now; or Hegel who, in the form of Taine


French soul.



In .



Beyond Good and Evil
(which is to say: in the form of the foremost living historian), exerts an
almost tyrannical inﬂuence these days. But as far as Wagner goes, the
more French music learns to develop according to the real needs of the
âme moderne, the more “Wagnerianized” it becomes; this can be predicted, – it is already happening now! Nevertheless, there are three things
that, even today, the French can proudly exhibit as their heir and their
own and an enduring mark of an old cultural superiority over Europe,
in spite of any voluntary or involuntary Germanization or vulgarization
of taste. One is the capacity for artistic passions and devotion to “form,”
for which the phrase l’art pour l’art  (along with a thousand others) was
invented. Things like this have not been absent from France for the last
three hundred years and, thanks to a reverence for “small numbers,” keep
making possible a type of literary chamber music that is not to be found
anywhere else in Europe –. The second point on which France can base
a claim to superiority over Europe is its old, diverse culture of moralism,
which means that even among little romanciers of newspapers and chance
boulevardiers de Paris you will ﬁnd, on average, a psychological sensitivity and curiosity that people in Germany, for instance, have no concept
of (much less the thing itself!). For this, the Germans would need a few
hundred years of moralism which, as I have said, France had not spared
itself. Anyone calling the Germans “naive” on this account is dressing up
a deﬁciency as a compliment. (As a contrast to the German inexperience
and innocence in voluptate psychologica – which is not at all unrelated to
the tedium of German company –, and as the most successful expression
of a genuinely French curiosity and inventiveness in this realm of delicate
tremblings, we can name Henri Beyle. This remarkable, anticipatory forerunner ran with a Napoleonic tempo through his Europe, through several
centuries of the European soul, as a pathﬁnder and discoverer of this soul.
It took two generations to somehow catch up with him, to guess some of
the riddles that tormented and delighted him, this strange Epicurean
and question-mark of a man who was France’s last great psychologist –.)


Modern soul.



Art for art’s sake.



Novelists.



People on the Parisian boulevards.



Taking pleasure in psychology.



Peoples and fatherlands
There is, in addition, a third claim to superiority: at the core of the
French there is a half-successful synthesis of north and south which lets
them conceive many things and do many others that will never occur to an
Englishman. Using a temperament that is turned periodically towards and
away from the south, and whose Provençal and Ligurian blood bubbles
over from time to time, the French fortify themselves against the awful
northern gray on gray, the sunless concept-ghostliness and anemia, – our
German disease of the taste, against whose excess people at the moment
are strongly resolved to prescribe blood and iron: I mean “great politics”
(following a dangerous medical practice that teaches me to wait and wait
but not, so far, to hope –). And in France there is still a predisposition
to understand and accommodate those rarer and rarely satisﬁed people
who are too far-ranging to ﬁnd satisfaction in any fatherlandishness, and
know how to love the south in the north and the north in the south, –
the born Mediterraneans, the “good Europeans.” – It was for them
that Bizet made music, this last genius to have seen a new beauty and
seduction, – who discovered a piece of the southernness of music.


I recommend taking a number of precautions against German music.
Suppose that someone loves the south like I do, as an immense school
for convalescence of both the most spiritual and the most sensual kind,
as an unbridled, sun-drenched, sun-transﬁguration that spreads across a
high-handed, self-assured existence: such a person will learn to be somewhat careful with German music, because, along with ruining his taste,
it will ruin his health again too. If someone like this (who is southern
not by descent but by belief ) dreams about the future of music, he will
also have to dream about music being redeemed from the north, and have
the prelude to a more profound and powerful, perhaps more evil and
mysterious music in his ears, a supra-German music that does not fade,
yellow, or pale at the sight of the voluptuous blue sea or the luminous
Mediterranean sky, which is what happens with all German music; a
supra-European music that still stands its ground before the brown sunsets of the desert, whose soul is related to the palm tree, and that knows


Bismarck’s famous phrase.



In German: Mittelländler (literally: people whose country is in the middle).



Beyond Good and Evil
how to wander and to be at home among huge, beautiful, lonely beasts
of prey . . . I could imagine a music whose rarest magic consisted in no
longer knowing anything of good and evil – although, perhaps, some
sailor’s homesickness, some golden shadow and delicate weakness might
run across it every now and then: an art that would see colors ﬂying
towards it from a setting moral world – a distant world that had become almost incomprehensible – and would be hospitable and profound
enough to receive such late refugees. –


Thanks to the pathological manner in which nationalist nonsense has
alienated and continues to alienate the peoples of Europe from each
other; thanks as well to the short-sighted and swift-handed politicians
who have risen to the top with the help of this nonsense, and have no idea
of the extent to which the politics of dissolution that they practice can
only be entr’acte politics, – thanks to all this and to some things that are
strictly unmentionable today, the most unambiguous signs declaring that
Europe wants to be one are either overlooked or willfully and mendaciously
reinterpreted. The mysterious labor in the souls of all the more profound
and far-ranging people of this century has actually been focused on preparing the path to this new synthesis and on experimentally anticipating the
Europeans of the future. Only in their foregrounds or in hours of weakness
(like old age) were they “fatherlanders,” – they only became “patriots”
when they were resting from themselves. I am thinking about people like
Napoleon, Goethe, Beethoven, Stendhal, Heinrich Heine, Schopenhauer:
and do not blame me for including Richard Wagner as well; we should not
let his own self-misunderstanding lead us astray – geniuses of his type do
not often have the right to understand themselves. Although, admittedly,
it is not so apparent given the rude clamor with which Wagner is resisted
and opposed in France today, it nonetheless remains the case that late
French romanticism of the ’s and Richard Wagner belong most closely
and intimately together. They are related, fundamentally related, in all the
heights and depths of their needs: it is the soul of Europe, the one Europe,
that presses and yearns upwards and outwards through their multiple and


In German: versuchsweise (see note , p.  above).



Peoples and fatherlands
tumultuous art – towards what? towards a new light? a new sun? But
who could really express something that all these masters of new means
of language did not know how to express clearly? What is certain is that
the same storm and stress tormented them, that they searched in the same
way, these last great seekers! They were all dominated by literature, up to
their eyes and ears – the ﬁrst artists with an education in world literature.
For the most part, they were themselves writers, poets, go-betweens and
mixers of the arts and the senses (as a musician, Wagner belongs among
painters, as a poet, among musicians, as an artist in general, among actors);
they were all fanatics of expression “at any cost” (I emphasize Delacroix,
Wagner’s next of kin), all of them great discoverers in the realm of the
sublime as well as the repugnant and repulsive, even greater discoverers in
effects, in showmanship, in the art of window displays; they were all talents
far above their genius –, virtuosos through and through, with uncanny
access to everything tempting, seductive, compelling, and subversive, born
enemies of logic and straight lines, longing for the foreign, the exotic, the
monstrous, the crooked, the self-contradictory. As humans, Tantaluses
of the will, plebeians on the rise who knew that they were incapable
of a noble tempo, a lento, in their life or work (just consider Balzac,
for instance), unconstrained workers, almost destroying themselves with
work: antinomians and agitators when it came to customs, ambitious
and insatiable without equilibrium or enjoyment; and in the end they
all crumbled and sank down in front of the Christian cross (and with
complete justiﬁcation: which one of them would have been profound
and original enough for a philosophy of the Antichrist? –); on the whole,
an adventurously daring, splendidly violent, high-ﬂying, high-ascending
type of higher men, who ﬁrst taught their century – and it is the century of
the masses! – the concept “higher man” . . . Let Richard Wagner’s German
friends decide whether there is something purely German about Wagner’s
art, or whether it is not distinguished precisely by its derivation from
supra-German sources and drives; the extent to which Paris in particular
was indispensable for the cultivation of Wagner’s type should not be
underestimated (the profundity of his instincts called him to Paris at the
decisive moment); nor should the extent to which his whole manner and
self-apostolate required the model of the French socialists. Perhaps closer
comparison will reveal, to the credit of Richard Wagner’s German nature,
that he did everything in a stronger, bolder, harder, and higher way than
a Frenchman of the nineteenth century could do, – thanks to the fact


Beyond Good and Evil
that we Germans are still closer to barbarism than the French are. The
strangest thing that Richard Wagner created might even be inaccessible,
incomprehensible, and inimitable to the entire, late, Latinate race, forever
and not just for now: the ﬁgure of Siegfried, that very free man, who may
in fact be far too free, too hard, too cheerful, too healthy, too anti-Catholic
for the taste of old and worn-out cultures. He might even have been a
sin against romanticism, this anti-romantic Siegfried – although Wagner
thoroughly atoned for this sin in his sad old age, when (anticipating a taste
that has since become political) he began preaching, if not traveling, the
way to Rome with a religious vehemence peculiar to himself. – So that
you do not misunderstand these ﬁnal words of mine, I want to use a few
strong rhymes; and then even less subtle ears will guess what I want, – what
I have against the “ﬁnal Wagner” and his Parsifal music.
– Is this still German? –
It’s from a German heart, this murky howling?
From German ﬂesh this self-aimed disemboweling?
It’s German then, this type of priestly feel,
This incense-scented sensuous appeal?
This broken, falling, swaggered swaying?
This unassured singsong-saying?
This nun-eyed Ave-chiming leavening,
This falsely raptured heaven-overheavening?
– Is this still German? –
Just think! You’re standing there, the doorway’s near,
It’s Rome! Rome’s faith without the text, you hear.


Siegfried is the heroic ﬁgure of Wagner’s mythological Ring der Nibelungen opera cycle. In his
ﬁnal opera, Parsifal, Wagner emphasized more explicitly Christian themes.



Part  What is noble?

Every enhancement so far in the type “man” has been the work of an
aristocratic society – and that is how it will be, again and again, since this
sort of society believes in a long ladder of rank order and value distinctions
between men, and in some sense needs slavery. Without the pathos of
distance as it grows out of the ingrained differences between stations, out
of the way the ruling caste maintains an overview and keeps looking down
on subservient types and tools, and out of this caste’s equally continuous
exercise in obeying and commanding, in keeping away and below – without
this pathos, that other, more mysterious pathos could not have grown at
all, that demand for new expansions of distance within the soul itself,
the development of states that are increasingly high, rare, distant, tautly
drawn and comprehensive, and in short, the enhancement of the type
“man,” the constant “self-overcoming of man” (to use a moral formula in
a supra-moral sense). Of course, you cannot entertain any humanitarian
illusions about how an aristocratic society originates (and any elevation
of the type “man” will presuppose an aristocratic society –): the truth is
harsh. Let us not be deceived about how every higher culture on earth
has begun! Men whose nature was still natural, barbarians in every terrible
sense of the word, predatory people who still possessed an unbroken
strength of will and lust for power threw themselves on weaker, more
civilized, more peaceful races of tradesmen perhaps, or cattle breeders;
or on old and mellow cultures in which the very last life-force was ﬂaring
up in brilliant ﬁreworks of spirit and corruption. The noble caste always
started out as the barbarian caste. Their supremacy was in psychic, not


Beyond Good and Evil
physical strength, – they were more complete people (which at any level
amounts to saying “more complete beasts” –).


Corruption, as an expression of the fact that anarchy threatens inside the
instincts and that the foundation of the affects, which we call “life,” has
been shaken: corruption means fundamentally different things, depending on the life-form in which it manifests itself. When, for instance, an
aristocracy like that in France at the beginning of the Revolution throws
away its privileges with a sublime disgust and sacriﬁces itself to an excess
of its moral feeling, then this is corruption. It was really just the ﬁnal
act of that centuries-long corruption in which the aristocracy gradually
relinquished its dominant authority and was reduced to a mere function
of the kingdom (and, in the end, to its trinket and showpiece). But the
essential feature of a good, healthy aristocracy is that it does not feel that
it is a function (whether of the kingdom or of the community) but instead
feels itself to be the meaning and highest justiﬁcation (of the kingdom or
community), – and, consequently, that it accepts in good conscience the
sacriﬁce of countless people who have to be pushed down and shrunk into
incomplete human beings, into slaves, into tools, all for the sake of the aristocracy. Its fundamental belief must always be that society cannot exist for
the sake of society, but only as the substructure and framework for raising
an exceptional type of being up to its higher duty and to a higher state
of being. In the same way, the sun-seeking, Javanese climbing plant called
the sipo matador will wrap its arms around an oak tree so often and for
such a long time that ﬁnally, high above the oak, although still supported
by it, the plant will be able to unfold its highest crown of foliage and show
its happiness in the full, clear light.


Mutually refraining from injury, violence, and exploitation, placing your
will on par with the other’s: in a certain, crude sense, these practices
can become good manners between individuals when the right conditions
are present (namely, that the individuals have genuinely similar quantities of force and measures of value, and belong together within a single
body). But as soon as this principle is taken any further, and maybe even


What is noble?
held to be the fundamental principle of society, it immediately shows itself for what it is: the will to negate life, the principle of disintegration
and decay. Here we must think things through thoroughly, and ward off
any sentimental weakness: life itself is essentially a process of appropriating, injuring, overpowering the alien and the weaker, oppressing, being
harsh, imposing your own form, incorporating, and at least, the very least,
exploiting, – but what is the point of always using words that have been
stamped with slanderous intentions from time immemorial? Even a body
within which (as we presupposed earlier) particular individuals treat each
other as equal (which happens in every healthy aristocracy): if this body
is living and not dying, it will have to treat other bodies in just those
ways that the individuals it contains refrain from treating each other. It
will have to be the embodiment of will to power, it will want to grow,
spread, grab, win dominance, – not out of any morality or immorality, but
because it is alive, and because life is precisely will to power. But there
is no issue on which the base European consciousness is less willing to
be instructed than this; these days, people everywhere are lost in rapturous enthusiasms, even in scientiﬁc disguise, about a future state of society
where “the exploitative character” will fall away: – to my ears, that sounds
as if someone is promising to invent a life that dispenses with all organic
functions. “Exploitation” does not belong to a corrupted or imperfect,
primitive society: it belongs to the essence of being alive as a fundamental
organic function; it is a result of genuine will to power, which is just the
will of life. – Although this is an innovation at the level of theory, – at the
level of reality, it is the primal fact of all history. Let us be honest with
ourselves to this extent at least! –


As I was wandering through the many subtle and crude moralities that
have been dominant or that still dominate over the face of the earth, I found
certain traits regularly recurring together and linked to each other. In
the end, two basic types became apparent to me and a fundamental distinction leapt out. There is a master morality and a slave morality; – I will
immediately add that in all higher and more mixed cultures, attempts to
negotiate between these moralities also appear, although more frequently
the two are confused and there are mutual misunderstandings. In fact, you
sometimes ﬁnd them sharply juxtaposed – inside the same person even,


Beyond Good and Evil
within a single soul. Moral value distinctions have arisen within either a
dominating type that, with a feeling of well-being, was conscious of the
difference between itself and those who were dominated – or alternatively, these distinctions arose among the dominated people themselves,
the slaves and dependants of every rank. In the ﬁrst case, when dominating people determine the concept of “good,” it is the elevated, proud
states of soul that are perceived as distinctive and as determining rank
order. The noble person separates himself off from creatures in which the
opposite of such elevated, proud states is expressed: he despises them. It
is immediately apparent that, in this ﬁrst type of morality, the contrast
between “good” and “bad” amounts to one between “noble” and “despicable” (the contrast between “good” and “evil ” has a different lineage).
People who were cowardly, apprehensive, and petty, people who thought
narrowly in terms of utility – these were the ones despised. But the same
can be said about distrustful people with their uneasy glances, about grovelers, about dog-like types of people who let themselves be mistreated,
about begging ﬂatterers and, above all, about liars: – it is a basic belief of
aristocrats that base peoples are liars. “We who are truthful” – that is what
the nobility of ancient Greece called themselves. It is obvious that moral
expressions everywhere were ﬁrst applied to people and then, only later
and derivatively, to actions (which is why it is a tremendous mistake when
historians of morality take their point of departure from questions such
as “why do acts of pity get praised?”). The noble type of person feels that
he determines value, he does not need anyone’s approval, he judges that
“what is harmful to me is harmful in itself,” he knows that he is the one
who gives honor to things in the ﬁrst place, he creates values. He honors
everything he sees in himself: this sort of morality is self-glorifying. In
the foreground, there is the feeling of fullness, of power that wants to
overﬂow, the happiness associated with a high state of tension, the consciousness of a wealth that wants to make gifts and give away. The noble
person helps the unfortunate too, although not (or hardly ever) out of
pity, but rather more out of an impulse generated by the over-abundance
of power. In honoring himself, the noble man honors the powerful as well
as those who have power over themselves, who know how to speak and
be silent, who joyfully exercise severity and harshness over themselves,
and have respect for all forms of severity and harshness. “Wotan has put
a hard heart in my breast,” reads a line from an old Scandinavian saga:
this rightly comes from the soul of a proud Viking. This sort of a man


What is noble?
is even proud of not being made for pity: which is why the hero of the
saga adds, by way of warning, “If your heart is not hard when you are
young, it will never be hard.” The noble and brave types of people who
think this way are the furthest removed from a morality that sees precisely
pity, actions for others, and désintéressement as emblematic of morality. A
faith in yourself, pride in yourself, and a fundamental hostility and irony
with respect to “selﬂessness” belong to a noble morality just as certainly
as does a slight disdain and caution towards sympathetic feelings and
“warm hearts.” – The powerful are the ones who know how to honor; it
is their art, their realm of invention. A profound reverence for age and
origins – the whole notion of justice is based on this double reverence –, a
faith and a prejudice in favor of forefathers and against future generations
is typical of the morality of the powerful. And when, conversely, people
with “modern ideas” believe almost instinctively in “progress” and “the
future,” and show a decreasing respect for age, this gives sufﬁcient evidence of the ignoble origin of these “ideas.” But, most of all, the morality
of dominating types is foreign and painful to contemporary taste due to
its stern axiom that people have duties only towards their own kind; that
when it comes to creatures of a lower rank, to everything alien, people are
allowed to act as they see ﬁt or “from the heart,” and in any event, “beyond
good and evil” –: things like pity might have a place here. The capacity
and duty to experience extended gratitude and vengefulness – both only
among your own kind –, subtlety in retaliation, reﬁnement in concepts
of friendship, a certain need to have enemies (as ﬂue holes, as it were,
for the affects of jealousy, irascibility, arrogance, – basically, in order to
be a good friend ): all these are characteristic features of noble morality
which, as I have suggested, is not the morality of “modern ideas,” and
this makes it difﬁcult for us to relate to, and also difﬁcult for us to dig
it up and lay it open. – It is different with the second type of morality,
slave morality. What if people who were violated, oppressed, suffering,
unfree, exhausted, and unsure of themselves were to moralize: what type
of moral valuations would they have? A pessimistic suspicion of the whole
condition of humanity would probably ﬁnd expression, perhaps a condemnation of humanity along with its condition. The slave’s gaze resents
the virtues of the powerful. It is skeptical and distrustful, it has a subtle
mistrust of all the “good” that is honored there –, it wants to convince


Disinterestedness.



Beyond Good and Evil
itself that even happiness is not genuine there. Conversely, qualities that
serve to alleviate existence for suffering people are pulled out and ﬂooded
with light: pity, the obliging, helpful hand, the warm heart, patience, industriousness, humility, and friendliness receive full honors here –, since
these are the most useful qualities and practically the only way of holding
up under the pressure of existence. Slave morality is essentially a morality of utility. Here we have the point of origin for that famous opposition
between “good” and “evil.” Evil is perceived as something powerful and
dangerous; it is felt to contain a certain awesome quality, a subtlety and
strength that block any incipient contempt. According to the slave morality then, “evil” inspires fear; but according to the master morality, it is
“good ” that inspires and wants to inspire fear, while the “bad” man is seen
as contemptible. The opposition comes to a head when, following the logic
of slave morality, a hint of contempt (however slight and well disposed)
ﬁnally comes to be associated with even its idea of “good,” because within
the terms of slave morality, the good man must always be unthreatening: he
is good-natured, easy to deceive, maybe a bit stupid, un bonhomme. Wherever slave morality holds sway, language shows a tendency for the words
“good” and “stupid” to come closer together. – A ﬁnal fundamental distinction: the desire for freedom, the instinct for happiness, and subtleties
in the feeling of freedom necessarily belong to slave morals and morality,
just as an artistry and enthusiasm in respect and devotion are invariant
symptoms of an aristocratic mode of thinking and valuing. – This clearly
shows why love as passion (our European specialty) must have had a purely
noble descent: it is known to have been invented in the knightly poetry of
Provence, by those magniﬁcent, inventive men of the “gai saber.” Europe
is indebted to these men for so many things, almost for itself.


Vanity is perhaps one of the most difﬁcult things for a noble person to
comprehend: he will be tempted to keep denying it when a different type
of man will almost be able to feel it in his hands. He has difﬁculty imagining creatures who would try to inspire good opinions about themselves
that they themselves do not hold – and consequently do not “deserve”


A good simple fellow.



Gay science.



What is noble?
either –, and who would then end up believing these good opinions. For one
thing, this strikes the noble as being so tasteless and showing such a lack of
self-respect, and, for another thing, it seems so baroque and unreasonable
to him, that he would gladly see vanity as an exception and stay skeptical in
most of the cases where it is brought up. For example, he will say: “I can be
wrong about my own worth and still insist that other people acknowledge
it to be what I say it is, – but that is not vanity (instead, it is arrogance or,
more frequently, it is what they call ‘humility’ or ‘modesty’).” Or alternatively: “There are many reasons why I can enjoy other people’s good
opinions, perhaps because I love and honor them and rejoice in each of
their joys, and perhaps also because their good opinions conﬁrm and reinforce my faith in my own good opinion of myself, perhaps because other
people’s good opinions are useful or look as though they could be useful
to me, even when I don’t agree with them, – but none of that is vanity.”
It is only when forced (namely with the help of history) that the noble
person realizes that from time immemorial, in all strata of people who are
in some way dependent, base people were only what they were considered
to be: – not being at all accustomed to positing values, the only value the
base person attributes to himself is the one his masters have attributed to
him (creating values is the true right of masters). We can see it as the result
of a tremendous atavism that, to this day, ordinary people still wait for an
opinion to be pronounced about themselves before instinctively deferring
to it. And this is by no means only the case with “good” opinions – they
defer to bad and unfair ones as well (for instance, just think about most of
the self-estimations and self-underestimations that devout women accept
from their father confessors and, in general, that devout Christians accept
from their church). As a matter of fact, in keeping with the slow approach
of a democratic order of things (and its cause, the mixing of blood between masters and slaves), the originally rare and noble urge to ascribe to
yourself a value that comes from yourself, and to “think well” of yourself
is now increasingly widespread and encouraged. But in every age it is
opposed by an older, broader, and more thoroughly ingrained tendency, –
and in the phenomenon of “vanity,” this older tendency gains mastery
over the younger. The vain take pleasure in every good opinion they hear
about themselves (abstracted entirely from the point of view of utility,
and just as much removed from truth or falsity), just as they suffer from
every bad opinion. This is because they submit – they feel submissive – to
both good and bad opinions out of that oldest instinct of submissiveness


Beyond Good and Evil
which erupts within them. – This is “the slave” in the blood of the vain,
a remnant of the mischief of the slave – and how much “slave” is still left
over in women, for instance! –, they try to seduce people into having good
opinions of them. By the same token, it is the slave who submits to these
opinions immediately afterwards, as if he were not the one who had just
called for them. – And to say it again: vanity is an atavism.


A species originates, a type grows sturdy and strong, in the long struggle
with essentially constant unfavorable conditions. Conversely, people know
from the experience of breeders that species with overabundant diets and,
in general, more than their share of protection and care, will immediately
show a striking tendency towards variations of the type, and will be rich in
wonders and monstrosities (including monstrous vices). You only need to
see an aristocratic community (such as Venice or an ancient Greek polis )
as an organization that has been established, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, for the sake of breeding: the people living there together are
self-reliant and want to see their species succeed, mainly because if they
do not succeed they run a horrible risk of being eradicated. Here there
are none of the advantages, excesses, and protections that are favorable
to variation. The species needs itself to be a species, to be something
that, by virtue of its very hardness, uniformity, and simplicity of form,
can succeed and make itself persevere in constant struggle with its neighbors or with the oppressed who are or threaten to become rebellious. A
tremendous range of experiences teaches it which qualities are primarily
responsible for the fact that, despite all gods and men, it still exists, it
keeps prevailing. It calls these qualities virtues, and these are the only
virtues it fosters. It does so with harshness; in fact, it desires harshness.
Every aristocratic morality is intolerant about the education of the young,
disposal over women, marriage customs, relations between old and young
and penal laws (which only concern deviants): – it considers intolerance
itself to be a virtue, under the rubric of “justice.” A type whose traits
are few in number but very strong, a species of people who are strict,
warlike, clever, and silent, close to each other and closed up (which gives


In German: Art. In this section, Art is translated as “species” and Typus as “type.”



City-state.



What is noble?
them the most subtle feeling for the charms and nuances of association)
will, in this way, establish itself (as a species) over and above the change
of generations. The continuous struggle with constant unfavorable conditions is, as I have said, what causes a type to become sturdy and hard.
But, eventually, a fortunate state will arise and the enormous tension will
relax; perhaps none of the neighbors are enemies anymore, and the means
of life, even of enjoying life, exist in abundance. With a single stroke,
the bonds and constraints of the old discipline are torn: it does not seem
to be necessary any more, to be a condition of existence, – if it wanted
to continue, it could do so only as a form of luxury, as an archaic taste.
Variation, whether as deviation (into something higher, ﬁner, rarer) or
as degeneration and monstrosity, suddenly comes onto the scene in the
greatest abundance and splendor; the individual dares to be individual
and different. At these turning points of history, a magniﬁcent, diverse,
jungle-like growth and upward striving, a kind of tropical tempo in the
competition to grow will appear alongside (and often mixed up and tangled together with) an immense destruction and self-destruction. This is
due to the wild egoisms that are turned explosively against each other,
that wrestle each other “for sun and light,” and can no longer derive any
limitation, restraint, or refuge from morality as it has existed so far. It
was this very morality that accumulated the tremendous amount of force
to put such a threatening tension into the bow: – and now it is, now it
is being “outlived.” The dangerous and uncanny point has been reached
when the greatest, most diverse, most comprehensive life lives past the
old morality. The “individual” is left standing there, forced to give himself laws, forced to rely on his own arts and wiles of self-preservation,
self-enhancement, self-redemption. There is nothing but new whys and
hows; there are no longer any shared formulas; misunderstanding is allied with disregard; decay, ruin, and the highest desires are horribly entwined; the genius of the race overﬂows from every cornucopia of good
and bad; there is a disastrous simultaneity of spring and autumn, ﬁlled
with new charms and veils that are well suited to the young, still unexhausted, still indefatigable corruption. Danger has returned, the mother
of morals, great danger, displaced onto the individual this time, onto
the neighbor or friend, onto the street, onto your own child, onto your
own heart, onto all of your own-most, secret-most wishes and wills: and
the moral philosophers emerging at this time – what will they have to
preach? These sharp observers and layabouts discover that everything


Beyond Good and Evil
is rapidly coming to an end, that everything around them is ruined and
creates ruin, that nothing lasts as long as the day after tomorrow except
one species of person, the hopelessly mediocre. Only the mediocre have
prospects for continuing on, for propagating – they are the people of
the future, the only survivors: “Be like them! Be mediocre!” is the only
morality that still makes sense, that still ﬁnds ears. But this morality of
mediocrity is difﬁcult to preach! It can never admit what it is and what
it wants! It has to talk about moderation and dignity and duty and loving
your neighbors, – it will have a hard time hiding its irony! –


There is an instinct for rank that, more than anything else, is itself the sign
of a high rank; there is a pleasure in nuances of respect that indicates a noble
origin and noble habits. The subtlety, quality, and stature of a soul is put
dangerously to the test when something of the ﬁrst rank passes by before
the shudders of authority are there to protect it from intrusive clutches
and crudeness: something that goes on its way like a living touchstone,
undiscovered, unmarked, and experimenting, perhaps voluntarily covered and disguised. Anyone whose task and exercise is the investigation
of souls will use this very art, in a variety of forms, to establish the ultimate
value of a soul, the unalterable, inborn order of rank it belongs to: this
sort of investigator will test out the soul’s instinct for respect. Différence
engendre haine: many natures have a baseness that suddenly bursts out,
like dirty water, when any sort of holy vessel, any sort of treasure from a
closed shrine, any sort of book that bears the mark of a great destiny is
carried past. On the other hand, there is an involuntary hush, a hesitation
of the eye and a quieting of every gesture, all of which indicate that the
soul feels the presence of something deserving the highest honors. The
way in which respect for the Bible has, on the whole, been maintained in
Europe might be the best piece of discipline and reﬁnement in manners
that Europe owes to Christianity. Books with this sort of profundity and
ultimate meaning need the protection of an externally imposed tyranny
of authority; this way, they can last through the millennia that are needed
to use them up and ﬁgure them out. It is a great achievement when the


“Difference engenders hatred.”



What is noble?
masses (people of all kinds who lack depth or have speedy bowels) have
ﬁnally had the feeling bred into them that they cannot touch everything,
that there are holy experiences which require them to take off their shoes
and keep their dirty hands away, – and this is pretty much as high a level
of humanity as they will ever reach. Conversely, what is perhaps the most
disgusting thing about so-called scholars, the devout believers in “modern ideas,” is their lack of shame, the careless impudence of their eyes and
hands that touch, taste, and feel everything. And there might still be a
greater relative nobility of taste and tactfulness of respect within a people
these days, within a lower sort of people, namely within the peasantry,
than among the newspaper-reading demimonde of the spirit, the educated.


What a man’s forefathers liked doing the most, and the most often, cannot
be wiped from his soul: whether they were diligent savers and accessories
of some writing desk or cash box, modest and middle-class in their wants
and modest in their virtues as well; or whether they lived their lives giving
orders from morning to night, fond of rough pleasures and perhaps of
even rougher duties and responsibilities; or whether they ﬁnally sacriﬁced
old privileges of birth and belongings in order to live entirely for their
faith – their “god” –, being people of a tender and unyielding conscience,
embarrassed by any compromise. It is utterly impossible that a person
might fail to have the qualities and propensities of his elders and ancestors
in his body: however much appearances might speak against it. This is
the problem of race. If you know anything about the ancestors, you can
draw conclusions about the child. Some sort of harmful immoderation,
some sort of corner jealousy, a clumsy insistence on always being right –
together, these three elements have constituted the true “vulgar” type in
every age. And something like this will be passed on to the child just as
certainly as contaminated blood. With the help of the best education and
culture, people will only just reach the point of being able to lie about a
bequest like this. And what else are education and culture for these days! In
our very popular, which is to say vulgar age, “education” and “culture”
essentially have to be the art of deception – to deceive about lineage,
about the inherited vulgarity in body and soul. An educator who preaches
truthfulness above all else these days and constantly calls for his students
to “be true! be natural! be what you are!” – after a while, even a virtuous and


Beyond Good and Evil
trusting ass like this will learn to reach for that furca of Horace, in order to
naturam expellere: and with what success? “The vulgar” usque recurret. –


At the risk of annoying innocent ears I will propose this: egoism belongs
to the essence of the noble soul. I mean that ﬁrm belief that other beings
will, by nature, have to be subordinate to a being “like us” and will have to
sacriﬁce themselves. The noble soul accepts this fact of its egoism without
any question-mark, and also without feeling any harshness, compulsion,
or caprice in it, but rather as something that may well be grounded in
the primordial law of things. If the noble soul were to try to name this
phenomenon, it would call it “justice itself.” It admits to itself, under
certain circumstances (that at ﬁrst give it pause), that there are others
with rights equal to its own. As soon as it is clear about this question
of rank, it will move among these equals and “equally righted” with an
assured modesty and a gentle reverence equal to how it treats itself, in
accordance with an inborn, celestial mechanics that all stars know so well.
This is just another piece of its egoism, this ﬁnesse and self-limitation in
dealing with equals – every star is an egoist of this sort. And the noble
soul honors itself in them and in the rights that it gives them; it has no
doubt that the exchange of rights and honors belongs to the natural state
of things too, as the essence of all interaction. The noble soul gives as it
takes, out of the passionate and sensitive instinct of retribution that is so
fundamental to it. The concept of “mercy” is senseless and noisome inter
pares; there might be a sublime way of letting gifts fall down on you from
above, as it were, and lapping them up like raindrops; but the noble soul
has no talent for this art and conduct. Its egoism gets in the way: it does
not generally like looking “upwards,” – but rather ahead, horizontally and
slowly, or downwards: – it knows that it is high up. –


“One can only truly admire those who do not seek themselves.” – Goethe
to Rat Schlosser.



“Try expelling nature with a pitchfork and it keeps coming back,” from Horace’s Epistolae, I, ,
.
Between equals.



What is noble?


The Chinese have an expression that even mothers teach their children:
siao-sin, “make your heart small !” This is the true, basic tendency of late
civilizations: I have no doubt that this sort of self-belittlement would be
the ﬁrst thing an ancient Greek would notice in us Europeans of today, –
and this alone would already “offend his taste.” –


What, in the end, is base? – Words are acoustic signs for concepts; concepts, though, are more or less determinate pictorial signs for sensations
that occur together and recur frequently, for groups of sensations. Using
the same words is not enough to get people to understand each other: they
have to use the same words for the same species of inner experiences too;
ultimately, people have to have the same experience base. This is why a
people in a community will understand each other better than they understand people belonging to other groups, even when they all use the same
language. Or rather, when individuals have lived together for a long time
under similar conditions (of climate, soil, danger, necessities, work), there
arises something that “understands itself ” – a people. In all souls, an equal
number of frequently recurring experiences have gained an upper hand
over ones that occur less frequently: understanding takes place faster and
faster on this basis (the history of language is the history of a process of
abbreviation); and people join closer and closer together on the basis of
this understanding. The greater the danger, the greater the need to agree
quickly and easily about necessities. Not to misunderstand each other
when there is danger: people require this in order to interact with each
other. In every friendship or relationship, people still put this principle
to the test: nothing will last once the discovery is made that one of the
two feels, means, senses, wishes, fears something different from the other
when using the same words. (Fear of the “eternal misunderstanding”:
this is the benevolent genius that so often keeps people of the opposite
sex from rushing into relationships at the insistence of their hearts and
senses – and not some Schopenhauerian “genius of the species” –!) What


In German: Gemeinheit. Another possible translation is “common,” which captures the sense of
the word (and the point of the passage) according to which base qualities are found among common
people, or are what people have in common. I have chosen to translate gemein as base (both here
and throughout the text) since it captures more of the derogatory connotations of the term.



Beyond Good and Evil
group of sensations in a soul will be the ﬁrst to wake up, start speaking,
and making demands is decisive for the whole rank order of its values, and
will ultimately determine its table of goods. A person’s valuations reveal
something about the structure of his soul and what the soul sees as its
conditions of life, its genuine needs. Now, assuming that needs have only
ever brought people together when they could somehow indicate similar
requirements and similar experiences with similar signs, then it follows,
on the whole, that the easy communicability of needs (which ultimately
means having only average and base experiences) must have been the most
forceful of the forces that have controlled people so far. People who are
more alike and ordinary have always been at an advantage; while people who are more exceptional, reﬁned, rare, and difﬁcult to understand
will easily remain alone, prone to accidents in their isolation and rarely
propagating. Immense countervailing forces will have to be called upon
in order to cross this natural, all-too-natural progressus in simile, people
becoming increasingly similar, ordinary, average, herd-like, – increasingly
base!


The more a psychologist – a born, inevitable psychologist and unriddler
of souls – turns to exceptional cases and people, the greater the danger
that he will be choked with pity: he needs hardness and cheerfulness more
than anyone else. The ruin, the destruction of higher people, of strangely
constituted souls, is the rule: it is horrible always to have a rule like this
in front of your eyes. The manifold torment of the psychologist who
discovered this destruction, who ﬁrst discovered and then kept rediscovering (in almost every case) the whole inner “hopelessness” of the higher
person, the eternal “too late!” in every sense, throughout the entirety of
history, – this torment might make him turn bitterly against his own lot
one day and try to destroy himself, – to “ruin” himself. In almost every psychologist, you ﬁnd a telling inclination and preference for dealing
with normal, well-ordered people. This reveals that the psychologist is
in constant need of a cure, of a type of forgetting and escape from the
things that make his insight and incisiveness, that make his “craft” weigh
heavily on his conscience. It is characteristic of him to be afraid of his


Continuation of the same thing.



What is noble?
memory. He is easily silenced by other people’s judgments: he listens
with an unmoved face to how they honor, admire, love, and transﬁgure
what he has seen, – or he keeps his silence hidden by expressly agreeing with some foreground opinion. Perhaps the paradox of his condition
becomes so horrible that the masses, the educated, the enthusiasts, develop a profound admiration for the very things he has learned to regard
with profound pity and contempt, – they admire the “great men” and
prodigies who inspire people to bless and honor the fatherland, the earth,
the dignity of humanity, and themselves, “great men” who are pointed
out to young people for their ediﬁcation . . . And who knows if this is not
just what has happened in all great cases so far: the masses worshiped a
God, – and that “God” was only a poor sacriﬁcial animal! Success has
always been the greatest liar, – and the “work” itself is a success. The great
statesman, the conqueror, the discoverer – each one is disguised by his
creations to the point of being unrecognizable. The “work” of the artist,
of the philosopher, is what invents whoever has created it, whoever was
supposed to have created it. “Great men,” as they are honored, are minor
pieces of bad literature, invented after the fact; in the world of historical
values, counterfeit rules. These great authors, for example, this Byron,
Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol, – they are, and perhaps have to
be men of the moment, excited, sensual, and childish, thoughtless and
sudden in trust and mistrust; with souls that generally hide some sort
of crack; often taking revenge in their work for some inner corruption,
often ﬂying off in search of forgetfulness for an all-too-faithful memory,
often getting lost in the mud and almost falling in love with it until they
become like the will-o’-the-wisps around swamps and pretend to be stars
(then people might call them idealists), often ﬁghting a prolonged disgust,
a recurring specter of unbelief that makes them cold and forces them to
pine for gloria and to feed on “faith in itself ” from the hands of drunken
ﬂatterers. What torture these great artists and higher people in general are
for anyone who has ever guessed what they really are! It is easy to imagine
that these men will soon be subject to eruptions of boundless and most
devoted pity from women in particular (who are clairvoyant in the world
of suffering and whose desires to help and save far exceed their ability to
actually do so). The masses, the adoring masses, above all, do not understand this pity, and they pile all sorts of nosy and smug interpretations


Fame.



Beyond Good and Evil
on it. This pity is continually deceived as to its own strength; women
would like to believe that love makes all things possible, – this is their true
faith. Oh, those who know hearts can guess how impoverished, stupid,
helpless, presumptuous, and mistaken even the best and deepest love really is – how much more likely it is to destroy than to rescue! – It is
possible that one of the most painful cases of the martyrdom of knowledge about love lies hidden under the holy fable and disguise of the life
of Jesus: the martyrdom of the most innocent and wishful of hearts, who
never had enough of human love, who asked for nothing other than to
love and be loved, but who asked it with harshness, with madness, with
horrible outbursts against anyone refusing to love him; the story of a
poor man who was unsatisﬁed and insatiable in love, who had to invent
hell for there to be somewhere to send people who did not want to love
him, – and who, in the end, having learned about human love, had to
invent a God who was all love and all ability to love, – who had mercy on
human love for being so desperately poor and ignorant! – Anyone who
feels this way, anyone who knows this about love – will look for death. –
But why give yourself up to such painful things? Assuming you do not
have to. –


The spiritual arrogance and disgust of anyone who has suffered deeply
(order of rank is almost determined by just how deeply people can suffer), the trembling certainty that saturates and colors him entirely, a certainty that his sufferings have given him a greater knowledge than the
cleverest and wisest can have, that he knows his way around and was
once “at home” in many distant and terrifying worlds that “you don’t
know anything about!” . . . this spiritual, silent arrogance of the sufferer,
this pride of knowledge’s chosen one, its “initiate,” almost its martyr,
needs all kinds of disguises to protect itself from the touch of intrusive and pitying hands, and in general from everyone who is not its
equal in pain. Profound suffering makes you noble; it separates. One
of the most reﬁned forms of disguise is Epicureanism, and a certain
showy courage of taste that accepts suffering without a second thought
and resists everything sad and profound. There are “cheerful people”
who use cheerfulness because it lets them be misunderstood: – they
want to be misunderstood. There are “scientiﬁc people” who use science


What is noble?
because it gives a cheerful appearance, and because being scientiﬁc implies
that a person is superﬁcial: – they want to encourage this false inference.
There are free, impudent spirits who would like to hide and deny that they
are shattered, proud, incurable hearts; and sometimes even stupidity is
the mask for an ill-fated, all-too-certain knowing. – From which it follows
that a more reﬁned humanity will have great respect for “masks,” and will
not indulge in psychology and curiosity in the wrong place.


The thing that separates two people the most is a difference in their
sense and degree of cleanliness. All the good behavior, mutual utility, and
goodwill in the world will not help: what matters, in the end, is that they
“can’t stand the smell of each other!” The highest instinct of cleanliness
puts someone afﬂicted with it into the strangest and most dangerous
solitude, in the form of a holy saint: because this is what holiness is – the
highest spiritualization of this instinct. Some sort of shared knowledge of
an indescribable abundance of joy in bathing, some sort of lust and craving
that constantly drives the soul out of the night and into the morning, out
of dullness and gloom into light, radiance, profundity, ﬁnesse –: however
much a tendency like this characterizes somebody (it is a noble tendency),
it separates him out as well. – The pity of the saint is a pity for the ﬁlth of
the human, all-too-human. And there are degrees and heights where he
feels even pity as a form of pollution, as ﬁlth . . .


Signs of nobility: never thinking about debasing our duties into duties
for everyone, not wanting to relinquish, not wanting to share your own
responsibility; considering privileges and the exercise of these privileges
as a duty.


Someone who strives for greatness will regard everyone he comes across as
either a means or a delay and obstacle – or as a temporary resting place. His
distinctive and superior graciousness towards his fellow creatures is only
possible when he is at his best, at his height, and dominating. Impatience


Beyond Good and Evil
and his awareness of being condemned to comedy until then (since even
war is a comedy and concealment, just as every means conceals the end)
ruins all company for him. This type of person knows solitude and what
is most poisonous about it.


The problem of those who wait. Strokes of luck and many unpredictable
factors are needed for a higher person, who contains the dormant solution
to a problem, to go into action at the right time, “into explosion” you might
say. This does not usually happen, and in every corner of the earth people
sit waiting, hardly knowing how much they are waiting, much less that
they are waiting in vain. And every once in a while, the alarm call will
come too late, the chance event that gives them “permission” to act, – just
when the prime of youth and strength for action has already been depleted
by sitting still. And how many people have realized in horror, just as they
“jump up,” that their limbs have gone to sleep and their spirit is already
too heavy! “It’s too late” – they say, having lost faith in themselves and
being useless from this point on. – What if in the realm of genius, the
“Raphael without hands” (taking that phrase in the broadest sense) is
not the exception but, perhaps, the rule? Perhaps genius is not rare at
all: what is rare is the ﬁve hundred hands that it needs to tyrannize the
καιóς , “the right time,” in order to seize hold of chance!


People who do not want to see someone’s height will look all the more
closely at everything about him that is low and in the foreground – in so
doing, they show themselves for what they really are.


With every type of wound and loss, the lower, cruder soul is better off
than the nobler soul. The dangers for the nobler soul must be greater;
the likelihood that it will get into an accident and be destroyed is truly
enormous, given the diversity of its conditions of life. – When a lizard
loses a ﬁnger, it grows back: not so with people. –


This phrase from Lessing’s Emilia Galotti, act I, scene .



What is noble?


– Bad enough! The same old story! When you have ﬁnished building
your house, you suddenly notice that you have learned something in the
process that you absolutely needed to know before you started building. The eternal, tiresome “too late!” – The melancholy of everything
ﬁnished ! . . .


– Wanderer, who are you? I watch you go on your way, without scorn,
without love, with impenetrable eyes – damp and downhearted, like a
plumb line that returns unsatisﬁed from every depth back into the light
(what was it looking for down there?), with a breast that does not sigh, with
lips that hide their disgust, with a hand that only grips slowly: who are you?
What have you done? Take a rest here, this spot is hospitable to everyone, –
relax! And whoever you may be: what would you like now? What do you
ﬁnd relaxing? Just name it: I’ll give you whatever I have! – “Relaxing?
Relaxing? How inquisitive you are! What are you saying! But please, give
me – –” What? What? Just say it! – “Another mask! A second mask!” . . .


People with deep sorrows reveal this fact about themselves when they are
happy: they have a way of grasping hold of happiness, as if they wanted
to crush or suffocate it, out of jealousy. Oh, they know only too well that
it will run away from them!


“Too bad! What? Isn’t he going – backwards?” – Yes! But you understand
him badly if you complain about it. He is going backwards like someone
who wants to take a great leap. – –


– “Will anyone believe me? But I insist on being believed: I have never
been good at thinking about myself, and do so only on very rare occasions,
only when forced, without any desire to pursue ‘the matter,’ ready to


Beyond Good and Evil
digress away from ‘me,’ never with any faith in the results, all due to an
unconquerable distrust in the possibility of self-knowledge that has led me
to the point where I sense a contradictio in adjecto in even the concept
of ‘immediate knowledge’ that is permitted by theoreticians. This whole
state of affairs might be the most certain thing I do know about myself.
I must have a kind of revulsion against believing anything deﬁnite about
myself. Could there be a riddle here? Probably; but fortunately not one
for my teeth. – Could this reveal what species I belong to? – But not to
me: which is just how I want it to be. –”


“But what happened to you?” – “I don’t know,” he said hesitantly; “maybe
the harpies ﬂew over the table at me.” – Every once in a while these days,
a mild, moderate, restrained person will ﬂy into a sudden fury, smash
dishes, knock over tables, scream, throw ﬁts, insult everyone – and ﬁnally
go off, ashamed, furious at himself, – but where? And why? To starve far
away? To choke on his memory? – The danger will always be considerable
for someone with the desires of a high and discriminating soul, who rarely
ﬁnds his table set and his food ready: today, however, the danger will be
extraordinary. Thrown into a noisy, vulgar age and not wanting to eat out
of a single one of its bowls, he can easily die of hunger and thirst, or, if he
ﬁnally “digs in” anyway, he can be destroyed – by sudden nausea. – We
have probably all sat at tables where we did not belong; and the most spiritual among us (who are also the most difﬁcult to feed), are familiar with
that dangerous dyspepsia that comes from a sudden insight into and disappointment over our food and dining companions, – the after-dinner nausea.


It shows both subtle and noble self-control when you reserve your praise
(assuming you want to give praise at all) for things you disagree with: –
otherwise you would certainly be praising yourself, which offends good
taste. Of course, this type of self-control offers people a handy opportunity
and excuse for constantly misunderstanding you. In order to allow yourself
this real luxury of taste and morality, you cannot live with fools of the spirit;
you have to live among people whose misunderstandings and mistakes


Contradiction in terms.



What is noble?
are subtle, and for that reason still amusing – or else you will have to
pay dearly for it! – “He praises me: that’s why he agrees with me” – this
asinine inference ruins the better part of life for us hermits, because it
brings asses into our neighborhood and friendship.


To live with immense and proud composure; always beyond –. To freely
have or not have your affects, your pros and cons, to condescend to them
for a few hours; to seat yourself on them like you would on a horse or
often like you would on an ass: – since you need to know how to use your
stupidity as well as you know how to use your ﬁre. To keep your three
hundred foregrounds, and your dark glasses too: because there are times
when nobody can look into our eyes, or even less into our “grounds.” And
to choose for company that mischievous and cheerful vice, politeness.
And to keep control over your four virtues: courage, insight, sympathy,
solitude. Because solitude is a virtue for us, since it is a sublime inclination and impulse to cleanliness which shows that contact between people
(“society”) inevitably makes things unclean. Somewhere, sometime, every
community makes people – “base.”


The greatest events and thoughts – but the greatest thoughts are the
greatest events – are the last to be comprehended: generations that are
their contemporaries do not experience these sorts of events, – they live
right past them. The same thing happens here as happens in the realm
of stars. The light from the furthest stars is the last to come to people;
and until it has arrived, people will deny that there are – stars out there.
“How many centuries does it take for a spirit to be comprehended?” – this
standard is also used to create the rank order and etiquette needed – by
both spirit and star. –


“The vision is free here and the spirit elevated.” – But there is an inverse
type of person who is also at a height and also has a free vision – but who
looks down.


Cf. Goethe’s Faust II, line f.



Beyond Good and Evil


– What is noble? What does the word “noble” still mean to us today? How
do noble people reveal who they are, how can they be recognized under
this heavy, overcast sky of incipient mob rule that makes everything leaden
and opaque? – There are no actions that prove who they are, – actions
are always ambiguous, always unfathomable –; and there are no “works”
either. Among artists and scholars these days, you will ﬁnd plenty of
people whose works reveal them to be driven by a deep desire for nobility.
But this very need for nobility is fundamentally different from the needs
of the noble soul itself, and almost serves as an eloquent and dangerous
testimony to the absence of such needs. It is not works, it is faith that is
decisive here, faith that establishes rank order (this old, religious formula
now acquires a new and deeper meaning): some fundamental certainty
that a noble soul has about itself, something that cannot be looked for,
cannot be found, and perhaps cannot be lost either. – The noble soul has
reverence for itself. –


There are people who cannot avoid the fact that they have spirit, however much they might turn and twist, holding up their hands to prevent
their eyes from giving them away (– as if their hands did not betray
them too! –): in the end, they are always shown to be hiding something,
namely spirit. One of the most subtle ways of deceiving people (at least
for as long as this is possible), and successfully pretending to be more
stupid than you really are (a skill that is as handy as an umbrella, in
day-to-day life), is enthusiasm: including what belongs to it – virtue, for
instance. Because, as Galiani said, and he must have known –: vertu est
enthousiasme.


In a hermit’s writings, you can always hear something of the echo of the
desert, something of the whisper and the timid sideways glance of solitude.
A new and more dangerous type of silence, of concealment, rings out in
his strongest words, even in his cries. Anyone who has sat alone with


“Virtue is enthusiasm” from Galiani’s Letter to Madame d’Epinay, II, p. .



What is noble?
his soul in intimate dispute and dialogue, year in, and year out, day and
night, anyone who has become a cave bear or treasure hunter or treasure
guard and dragon in his cave (which might be a labyrinth but also a gold
mine): his very concepts will come to acquire their own twilight color, the
smell of depth just as much as of mildew, something uncommunicative
and reluctant that blows a chill on everything going past. The hermit
does not believe that a philosopher – given that a philosopher was always
a hermit ﬁrst – has ever expressed his actual and ﬁnal opinions in books:
don’t people write books precisely to keep what they hide to themselves?
In fact, he will doubt whether a philosopher could even have “ﬁnal and
actual” opinions, whether for a philosopher every cave does not have,
must not have, an even deeper cave behind it – a more extensive, stranger,
richer world above the surface, an abyss behind every ground, under every
“groundwork.” Every philosophy is a foreground philosophy – that is
a hermit’s judgment: “There is something arbitrary in his stopping here,
looking back, looking around, in his not digging any deeper here, and
putting his spade away – there is also something suspicious about it.”
Every philosophy conceals a philosophy too: every opinion is also a hiding
place, every word is also a mask.


Every profound thinker is more afraid of being understood than of being
misunderstood. The latter might hurt his vanity; but the former hurts his
heart and his sympathy which always says: “Oh, why do you want things
to be as hard for you as they are for me?”


The human being is a diverse, hypocritical, artiﬁcial, and opaque animal,
uncanny to other animals more because of his cunning and cleverness than
his strength; the human being invented good conscience so that he could
enjoy his soul as something simple, for once; and the whole of morality is
a brave and lengthy falsiﬁcation that makes it possible to look at the soul
with anything like pleasure. Perhaps this point of view involves a much
broader conception of “art” than people are used to.


In German: ein Abgrund hinter jedem Grunde, unter jeder “Begründung.”



Beyond Good and Evil


A philosopher: this is a person who constantly experiences, sees, hears,
suspects, hopes, and dreams extraordinary things; who is struck by his
own thoughts as if from outside, from above and below, as if by his type
of events and lightning bolts; who is perhaps a storm himself, pregnant
with new lightning; a fatal person in whose vicinity things are always
rumbling, growling, gaping, and acting in uncanny ways. A philosopher:
oh, a being who is frequently running away from himself, frequently afraid
of himself, – but too curious not to always come back to himself . . .


A man who says: “I like that, I’ll take it for my own and protect it and
defend it against everyone”; a man who can conduct business, carry out
a resolution, be faithful to a thought, hold on to a woman, punish and
defeat someone for being insolent; a man who has his anger and his sword,
and whom the weak, the suffering, the distressed, and even the animals
like to come to and, by nature, belong to; in short, a man who is naturally
master, – if a man like this has pity, well then! this pity is worth something!
But what good is the pity of the sufferer! Or particularly, the pity of
those who preach it! Almost everywhere in Europe today, there is a morbid
over-sensitivity and susceptibility to pain, as well as an excessive amount
of complaining and an increased tenderness that wants to dress itself up as
something higher, using religion as well as bits and pieces of philosophy, –
there is a real cult of suffering. The unmanliness of what is christened “pity”
in the circles of these enthusiasts is always, I think, the ﬁrst thing that
strikes your eye. – This latest type of bad taste needs to be forcefully and
thoroughly exorcized; and ultimately, I would like people to put the good
amulet of “gai saber” around their hearts and necks to ﬁght it off, – “gay
science,” to make it germane to Germans.


The Olympian vice. – In spite of that philosopher who, being a true
Englishman, tried to give laughter a bad reputation among all thoughtful


Nietzsche is again playing on the similarity between Mitleiden (pity) and leiden (to suffer).



In German: um es den Deutschen zu verdeutlichen (literally: to clarify it to Germans).



What is noble?
people –, “laughter is a terrible inﬁrmity of human nature, and one that
every thinking mind will endeavor to overcome” (Hobbes) –, I would go
so far as to allow myself a rank order of philosophers based on the rank
of their laughter – right up to those who are capable of golden laughter.
And given that even gods philosophize (a conclusion I have been drawn
to many times –), I do not doubt that they know a new and super-human
way of laughing – at the expense of everything serious! Gods like to make
fun of things: it seems as if they cannot stop laughing, even during holy
rites.


The genius of the heart, as it is possessed by that great hidden one, the
tempter god and born pied piper of consciences, whose voice knows
how to descend into the underworld of every soul, whose every word
and every glance conveys both consideration and a wrinkle of temptation,
whose mastery includes an understanding of how to seem – not like what
he is but rather like one more compulsion for his followers to keep pressing
closer to him, to keep following him more inwardly and thoroughly: – the
genius of the heart, that makes everything loud and complacent fall silent
and learn to listen, that smoothes out rough souls and gives them the
taste of a new desire, – to lie still, like a mirror that the deep sky can
mirror itself upon –; the genius of the heart, that teaches the foolish and
over-hasty hand to hesitate and reach out more delicately; that guesses the
hidden and forgotten treasure, the drop of goodness and sweet spirituality
under thick, dull ice, and is a divining rod for every speck of gold that has
long been buried in a prison of mud and sand; the genius of the heart,
that enriches everyone who has come into contact with it, not making
them blessed or surprised, or leaving them feeling as if they have been
gladdened or saddened by external goods; rather, they are made richer in
themselves, newer than before, broken open, blown on, and sounded out
by a thawing wind, perhaps less certain, more gentle, fragile, and broken,
but full of hopes that do not have names yet, full of new wills and currents,
full of new indignations and countercurrents . . . but what am I doing, my
friends? Who am I talking about? Have I forgotten myself so much that I
haven’t even told you his name? Unless you have already guessed on your


In German: Versucher-Gott. This could also mean the “experimenting god.”



Beyond Good and Evil
own who this questionable spirit and god is, who wants to be praised in
this way?
Like everyone who, from childhood, has constantly been underway
and abroad, I have had many strange and not unthreatening spirits run
across my path, but especially the one I have just been talking about, who
has crossed my path again and again – in other words, nobody less than
the god Dionysus, that great ambiguity and tempter god, to whom, as
you know, I once offered my ﬁrstborn in all secrecy and reverence. I
seem to be the last one to have offered him a sacriﬁce: because I have not
found anyone who understood what I was doing then. In the meantime,
I have learned much, all too much more about the philosophy of this
god, passed on, as I said, from mouth to mouth – I, the last disciple
and initiate of the god Dionysus: and can I, at last, start to give you,
my friends, a small taste of this philosophy, as far as I am permitted? In
undertones, which would be best, since it concerns many things that are
secret, new, foreign, strange, uncanny. Even the fact that Dionysus is a
philosopher and that, consequently, even gods philosophize, seems to me
like something new and not without its dangers, something that might
arouse mistrust precisely among philosophers, – among you, my friends,
it has less opposition, unless it comes too late and at the wrong time: I have
been told that you do not like believing in God and gods these days. And
perhaps in recounting my story, I will have to take frankness further than
will always be agreeable to the strict habits of your ears? Certainly, the
god in question went further in dialogues like this, much, much further,
and was always many steps ahead of me . . . In fact, if it were permissible
to follow human custom in ascribing beautiful, solemn names of splendor
and virtue to him, I would have to offer many praises for his explorer’s,
discoverer’s heart, for his daring and genuine honesty, his truthfulness
and his love of wisdom. But a god like this will have no use at all for this
honorable rubbish and splendor. “Keep this for yourself,” he would say,
“and for those like you and anyone else who needs it! I – have no reason
for covering my nakedness!” – You can guess: this type of divinity and
philosopher is, perhaps, lacking in shame? – He once said: “I love humans
under certain circumstances” – meaning Ariadne, who was present –:
“I think humans are pleasant, brave, inventive animals that have no equal
on earth, they ﬁnd their way around any labyrinth. I am very fond of


AreferencetoNietzsche’sﬁrstpublished book,DieGeburt derTragödie(TheBirthof Tragedy)().



What is noble?
them: I think about how I can help them advance and make them stronger,
more evil and more profound than they are.” – “Stronger, more evil, and
more profound?” I asked, startled. – “Yes,” he said again, “stronger, more
evil, and more profound; and more beautiful” – and at that, the tempter
god smiled his halcyon smile, as if he had just paid a charming compliment.
You can see: this divinity lacks more than just shame –; but you can also
see that there are good reasons for supposing that the gods could learn a
thing or two from us humans. We humans are – more human . . .


Oh, what are you anyway, my written and painted thoughts! It was not
long ago that you were still so colorful, young and malicious, so full of
thorns and secret spices that you made me sneeze and laugh – and now?
You have already lost your novelty, and I am afraid that some of you are
ready to turn into truths: they already look so immortal, so pathetically
decent and upright, so boring! And was it ever any different? So, what
subjects do we copy out and paint, we mandarins with Chinese brushes,
we immortalizers of things that let themselves be written – what are the
only things we can paint? Oh, only ever things that are about to wilt
and lose their smell! Only ever storms that have exhausted themselves
and are moving off, and feelings that are yellowed and late! Only ever
birds that have ﬂown and ﬂown astray until they are tired and can be
caught by hand, – by our hand! We only immortalize things that cannot
live and ﬂy for much longer, only tired and worn-out things! And I only
have colors for your afternoon, my written and painted thoughts, perhaps
many colors, many colorful affections and ﬁfty yellows and browns and
greens and reds: – but nobody will guess from this how you looked in
your morning, you sudden sparks and wonders of my solitude, you, my
old, beloved – – wicked thoughts!
∗



∗

∗

In German: menschlicher. This could also mean “more humane.”



FROM HIGH MOUNTAINS
Aftersong 
∗
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗
∗

∗
∗

Oh noon of life! Oh summer garden site
For celebrating!
There’s restless joy in standing watch and waiting!
I wait for friends, I’m ready day and night
Where are you, friends? Do come! The time is right!
For you, the glacier clothes its old gray hue
In rose attire,
The rivers seek you, running with desire,
The winds and clouds climb high into the blue,
As high as birds – to keep their watch for you.
My table waits for you with each delight: –
Such lonely ledges
Are home to few, save stars and chasms’ edges.
My realm – its bounds reach past the range of sight,
My honey too – who dreams they’ll taste the like? . . .
– Oh friends, you’re there! But – what grave ill portends? –
Am I a stranger?
You pause; your wonder wounds far worse than anger!
I am no more? – In face, or stride or hands?
But am I not what I am for you, friends?
So was I once another? Self-unknown?
I’ve left my own source?
A strength too often set against its own force?
A wrestler beaten by himself alone,
And wounded by a victory of his own?


Nietzsche follows a very strict rhyme and rhythmic scheme in this poem; the rhyme is ABBAA
throughout, and the meter follows a classical ode form (both are preserved in this translation).



From high mountains: Aftersong
I’ve looked where sharpest winds blow frozen air?
I’ve made my home here,
On glaciers where no other soul dares roam near,
Forgot both man and god, both curse and prayer?
Became a ghost who walked with polar bears?
– Old friends! See here! Your faces have gone white,
With love – and pain too!
Just leave in peace: there’s nothing to detain you:
Here in the distant ice-ﬁlled rocky height –
This realm belongs to hunters, born to ﬁght!
I’m now a wicked huntsman! Look – my bow
Is stiff and stock straight!
The strong alone can pull back such a taut weight – –:
Take care! My arrow’s speed is far from slow,
The danger’s great – so ﬂee to safety! go! . . .
You’re turning back? – Oh heart, this blow hits hard,
But hope must stay fast:
Hold open doors as new friends make their way past!
Old friends must be left back! Old memories barred!
You once were young – now, youth has been restored!
We shared one hope – that was our common band, –
Now – who reads these signs
That love had once inscribed, such faded half-lines?
They look just like a parchment that the hand
is loath to touch, – they’re just browned and tanned.
What are they called? – since friendship’s at an end –
Just ghostly brothers!
Who rattle nightly on my heart and shutters,
Who look at me and say: “you were my friend” –
– Those wilted words once bore a rosebud scent!
Oh youthful longing; how you failed to see
Dashed expectations!
Those friends turned family, seeming close relations,
– How they grew old, and turned their heels to ﬂee:
For only those who change keep ties with me.



Beyond Good and Evil
Oh noon of life! Oh summer garden bright!
Oh youth returning!
There’s restless joy in waiting, watching, yearning!
I wait for friends, I’m ready day and night
The new friends now! Do come! The time is right!
∗

∗
∗

This song is gone, – the longing cries are through,
Their sweet sounds ended.
The work of a magician I’d befriended,
The friend of noon-time – but – no! don’t ask who –
It was at noon, when one turned into two . . .
Now we can feast, with triumph in the air,
The fest of all fests:
Friend Zarathustra came, the guest of all guests!
The world can laugh, the gruesome curtain tear,
The wedding day of light and dark was here . . .
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗
∗

∗

∗
∗



Glossary of names
Aeschylus (c. – B.C.) Athenian dramatist
Alcibiades (c. – B.C.) Athenian statesman and general
Ariadne Greek mythological ﬁgure
Aristophanes (c. – B.C.) Athenian author of comedies
Athena Greek goddess of war and wisdom
Augustinus, Aurelius (–) Roman philosopher
Bacon, Francis, viscount of Verulam (–) English philosopher
Balzac, Honoré de (–) French novelist
Bayle, Pierre (–) French philosopher
Beethoven, Ludwig van (–) German composer
Bentham, Jeremy (–) English philosopher
Berkeley, George (–) Irish philosopher
Beyle, Henri see Stendhal
Bizet, Georges (–) French composer
Borgia, Cesare (–) Florentine nobleman
Boscovich, Ruggiero Giuseppe (–) Dalmatian mathematician
and philosopher
Bruno, Giordano (–) Italian philosopher
Byron, George Noel Gordon, Lord (–) English poet, author
of Manfred
Caesar, Gaius Julius (– B.C.) Roman statesman and general
Cagliostro, Alessandro, Count (Balsamo, Giuseppe) (–) Italian
adventurer
Carlyle, Thomas (–) Scottish philosopher and historian


Glossary of names
Catilina, Lucius Sergius (c. – B.C.) Roman nobleman
Cicero, Marcus Tullius (– B.C.) Roman philosopher and
politician
Circe Greek mythological ﬁgure
Comte, Auguste (–) French philosopher
Copernicus, Nicholas (–) Polish astronomer
Cromwell, Oliver (–) English statesman
Dante Alighieri (–) Italian poet, author of La Divina
Commedia
Darwin, Charles Robert (–) English biologist
Delacroix, Ferdinand Victor Eugène (–) French painter
Demosthenes (– B.C.) Greek orator and statesman
Descartes, René (–) French philosopher
Diderot, Denis (–) French philosopher
Dionysus Greek god
Dühring, Karl Eugen (–) German philosopher, author of
Der Werth des Lebens and Wirklichkeitsphilosophie
Empedocles (ﬁfth century B.C.) Presocratic philosopher and
statesman
Epicurus (– B.C.) Greek philosopher
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (–) German philosopher, author of
Speeches to the German Nation
Flaubert, Gustave (–) French novelist
Frederick II (the Great) (–) king of Prussia
Frederick II of Hohenstaufen (–) German emperor
Frederick William I (–) king of Prussia
Galiani, Ferdinando (–) Italian economist, author of Lettres à
Mme d’Epinay
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (–) German poet, novelist,
and statesman, author of Faust and Die Leiden des jungen Werther
Gogol, Nikolaj Vassilevic (–) Russian novelist
Guyon, Jeanne Marie de (–) French writer
Haﬁz (Mohammed Schams od-Din) (c. –) Persian poet
Hartmann, Eduard von (–) German philosopher


Glossary of names
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (–) German philosopher
Heine, Heinrich (–) German poet
Helvétius, Claude Adrien (–) French philosopher
Heraclitus (c. – B.C.) Presocratic philosopher
Hercules Greek mythological ﬁgure
Hobbes, Thomas (–) English philosopher
Hölderlin, Friedrich (–) German poet
Homer Greek poet
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (– B.C.) Roman poet, author
of Epistolae
Hugo, Victor (–) French novelist
Hume, David (–) Scottish philosopher
Jean Paul (Richter, Johann Paul Friedrich) (–)
novelist

German

Kant, Immanuel (–) German philosopher, author of Critique
of Pure Reason, Critique of Practical Reason and Groundwork to the
Metaphysic of Morals
Kleist, Heinrich von (–) German dramatist and
novelist
Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von (–) German
dramatist
Kundry Germanic mythological ﬁgure
Lambert, Anne Thérèse de Marguenat de Courcelles, marquise de
(–) French writer
La Rochefoucauld, François de (–) French moralist
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (–) German philosopher
Leonardo da Vinci (–) Florentine painter
Leopardi, Giacomo (–) Italian poet
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (–) German dramatist and critic,
author of Emilia Galotti
Locke, John (–) English philosopher
Luther, Martin (–) German theologian, leader of the
Protestant Reformation
Machiavelli, Niccolò (–) Italian politician, theorist, and
statesman, author of The Prince


Glossary of names
Marschner, Heinrich (–) German composer of operas,
among them Hans Heiling and Vampyr
Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, Felix (–) German composer
Mephistopheles devil in Goethe’s Faust
Michelet, Jules (–) French historian
Mill, John Stuart (–) English philosopher
Minotaur Greek mythological ﬁgure
Molière (Poqulin, Jean-Baptiste) (–) French dramatist, author
of Tartuffe and Le malade imaginaire
Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de (–) French essayist and
philosopher
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (–) Austrian composer
Münchhausen, Karl Friedrich Hieronymus, Freiherr von (–)
German nobleman
Musset, Alfred de (–) French writer
Napoleon Bonaparte (–) French emperor
Nausicaa Greek mythological ﬁgure
Odysseus Greek mythological ﬁgure
Oedipus Greek mythological ﬁgure
Pascal, Blaise (–) French philosopher
Pericles (c. – B.C.) Athenian statesman
Petronius Arbiter (d. A.D. ) Roman writer
Plato (c. – B.C.) Greek philosopher, author of The Laws
Poe, Edgar Allen (–) American poet and writer
Proteus Greek mythological ﬁgure
Raphael (Raffaelo Santi) (–) Italian painter
Renan, Ernest (–) French historian and philosopher
Roland de la Platière, Jeanne Marie (–) French writer
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (–) French philosopher
Sacchetti, Franco (c. –) Italian writer, author of Trecento
Novelle
Sainte-Beuve, Charles-Augustin de (–) French
writer
Saint-Evremond, Charles de Marguetel de Saint-Denis, seigneur de
(–) French writer


Glossary of names
Sand, George (Dudevant, Armandine-Aurore-Lucie, baronne de)
(–) French writer
Sand, Karl Ludwig (–) murderer of Kotzebue
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph (–) German
philosopher, author of Of the I as Principle of Philosophy
Schiller, Friedrich (–) German poet and writer
Schlosser, Johann Georg (–) brother-in-law of Goethe
Schopenhauer, Arthur (–) German philosopher, author of
The World as Will and Idea and The Two Fundamental Problems of
Ethics
Schumann, Robert (–) German composer of the opera
Manfred
Shakespeare, William (–) English poet and dramatist, author
of Hamlet
Shelley, Percy Bysshe (–) English poet
Siegfried Germanic mythological ﬁgure
Socrates (– B.C.) Athenian philosopher
Spencer, Herbert (–) English philosopher
Spinoza, Baruch (–) Dutch philosopher, author of Ethics
Staël-Holstein, Anne-Louise-Germaine de (–) French writer
Stendhal (Beyle, Henri) (–) French novelist
Sybel, Heinrich von (–) German historian and politician
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius (c. –) Roman historian, author of
Historiae
Taine, Hippolyte (–) French historian and art historian
Tiberius Claudius Nero ( B.C. – A.D ) Roman emperor
Treitschke, Heinrich Gotthard von (–) German historian
Voltaire (Arouet, François-Marie) (–)

French novelist

Wagner, Richard (–) German composer of operas, among them
Tannhäuser, Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg, Tristan und Isolde, Der
Ring der Nibelungen and Parsifal
Weber, Carl Maria von (–) German composer of operas,
among them Der Freischütz and Oberon
Wotan Scandinavian mythological ﬁgure
Zarathustra

Persian prophet and priest


Index
abstinence, , , 
action, , , , 
activity, –
adaptation, 
Aeschylus, 
affect, , , , , , , , 
age, –, 
agility, , 
Alcibiades, 
anarchism/anarchists/anarchy, , , ,

ancestors, , ; see also forefathers
animals, –
Antichrist, xiii, 
anti-Semitism, –
appearance, , , , , , , , ,
, , 
arguments, xix, xx
Ariadne, 
aristocracy, –
Aristophanes, –, , 
Aristotle/Aristotelianism, , 
arrogance, , 
art/artiﬁce/artists, xvii, , , , , ,
, , , , , , , ,
, –, , , , , 
Aryans, 
Asia, , 
astrology, , , 
atheism, , , , 
Athena, 
Athens/Athenians, , , 
atomism, , 
Augustine, Aurelius, St, , 
Austria, 
awareness, xxvii, 

Bacon, Francis, viscount of Verulam, 
bad, xviii, , , , , , , , , ,
, 
Balzac, Honoré de, , 
barbarian/barbarism, , , 
baseness, , –, 
Basle University, x
Bayle, Pierre, 
beauty, , , , , 
becoming, xxvi
Beethoven, Ludwig van, , , 
being, xxvi
beliefs, , , 
Bentham, Jeremy, 
Berkeley, George, xxi, 
Beyle, Henri see Stendhal
Bible, –, , 
birth, , , , 
Bizet, Georges, 
bloodline, 
body, , , 
books, , –, 
Borgia, Cesare, 
Boscovich, Ruggiero Giuseppe, 
bourgeoisie, viii, , 
Brahmins, 
breeding, , , , , 
British, the, 
Buddha/Buddhism, , , 
Byron, George Noel Gordon, Lord, –,

Caesar, Gaius Julius, , 
Cagliostro, Alessandro, Count (Balsamo,
Giuseppe), , 
calm, , 



Index
Carlyle, Thomas, 
caste, 
Catholicism, , 
Catilina, Lucius Sergius, 
causa prima, see cause
causa sui, see cause
causation, , 
cause, , , 
Celts, 
certainty/certainties, , 
immediate, , , 
Cervantes, Miguel de,  n. 
chance, , , , 
chaos, xvi, 
character, , 
Chiaja of Naples, 
children, , 
Chimaera, 
China, 
Christ, 
Christianity/Christians, xv, , , , , ,
, , –, , , , , , , ,
, , , 
church, , , , , , 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 
Circe, , 
claims, , –
class, , , 
cleanliness, , , , 
coldness, , 
command/commanders, –, , –,
, , , , , , , , ;
see also government, rule
communities/community, –, , , 
compulsion, , , 
Comte, Auguste, 
concealment, , 
concepts, –, 
conscience, , , , , , , , , , ,
, –, , , , , , ,
, , ; see also science
consciousness, , 
consequences, , 
consideration, , 
contempt, , , , 
contentment, , 
context, xiv, xxii, xxiii
cooking, –
Copernicus, Nicholas, 
corruption, –, , 
Corsica, 
courage, , , 
creation, xxv, 

creator/creature, , , 
critics, –
Cromwell, Oliver, 
cruelty, , , , –, 
culture, xi, xiv, , –, , , , 
cunning, , , , 
curiosity, , 
customs, , 
Cyclops, 
cynics/cynicism, –
dance, , , , , , 
danger, , , , , 
Dante Alighieri, 
daring, , 
Darwin, Charles Robert, , 
decay, xxiv, xxv, 
deception, , , 
decisions, , , 
degenerates/degeneration, xxiv, , 
Delacroix, Ferdinand Victor Eugène, 
democracy, xxiv, , , , , , 
Demosthenes, 
depth, , 
Descartes, René, , 
desires, , 
destiny, xiii, 
destruction, , 
development, human, , 
devil, the, , , , 
Diderot, Denis, 
digestion, , 
Dionysus, , 
discipline, , , , 
discovery, , ; see also invention
distance, xiv, xxvi–xxvii, 
diversity, , 
dogmatism, –, 
dominance/domination, , , , , ,
, , , , , , , 
doubt, , 
dreaming/dreams, , 
drives, , , , , , , , , –
Dühring, Karl Eugen, 
duties/duty, , , , , 
education, , , , , , , 
effect, , , , 
egoism, , , 
emancipation, , 
Empedocles, 
empiricism/empiricists, , 
England/English, the, , , , –



Index
enlightenment, , , –
enthusiasm, , , 
entitlements, , 
Epicurus/Epicureanism, –, , , , ,

epistemology, xxi, 
equality, xxiv, , , , , , 
Eros, 
erroneousness, see falseness
essence, xxvi, , , , 
Europe/Europeans, –, –, –, ,
, , , , , , 
evidence, visual, , , 
evil, xviii, , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , ; see also bad
existence, , , , 
existentialism, xxi
experience, xx n. , xxi–xxii, , , , , ,
, , 
experiment, , 
exploitation, –
eyes, , 
faculties, –
faith, xxiv, , , , –, , , , ,
– , , 
falseness, , , 
fasting, , 
fate/fatum, , –
fatherland, , , , , , 
fear, xxiv, , , , –, , , , ,

feelings, , , , 
femininity, x
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 
ﬁlth, , 
ﬁnery, , 
ﬁnesse, , 
Flaubert, Gustave, 
Florence, 
ﬂying, –
food, –
force/forces, , , , , 
forefathers, , ; see also ancestors
forgetfulness/forgetting, , 
form, , 
France, , , , , , , , –,
, 
Frederick II (the Great), king of Prussia, –
Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, German
emperor, 
Frederick William I, king of Prussia, 
freedom, , , , , , , , ;
see also un-freedom

free spirits, –, , , –, –, ,

free will, –, , , , 
Frenchmen, see France
French Revolution, , , , , , ,

friendliness/friends/friendship, , , 
future, , , 
Galiani, Ferdinando, , , 
genius, , , , 
Germany/Germans, viii, –, , , ,
–, , –, –
God, , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , –, , , ,
, , 
gods, , , , 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, , , , ,
, , , 
Gogol, Nikolaj Vassilevic, 
good, the/goodness, xviii, , , , , , ,
, , , –, , , , , ,
, , 
goodwill, , , –, 
government, ; see also command, rule
grammar, , , 
gratitude, , 
greatness, –, , 
Greece/Greeks, xvii, , , , , , 
grounds, , , 
growth, , 
Guyon, Jeanne Marie de, 
Haﬁz (Mohammed Schams od-Din), 
half-barbarism, –
Hamlet, 
happiness, , , , , , , , , ,
, , , 
hardness, , , , , 
harshness, , , , , , , , ,

Hartmann, Eduard von, 
hate/hatred, , , , , , 
heart, , , , , , , , 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, , , ,
, 
Heine, Heinrich, , 
hell, , 
help, xxiv, , 
Helvétius, Claude Adrien, 
Heraclitus, 
Hercules, 
herd, , –, –, , , , 
heredity, 



Index
hermits, , , , 
historians/history, , , –, –, 
historical sense, –
Hobbes, Thomas, , 
Hölderlin, Friedrich,  n. 
Homer, , , 
honesty, , , , , –, –, , 
honor/dishonor, , , , , , , 
hope, , , 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus), 
Hugo, Victor, 
humans/humanity, xv, , , , , –,
–, , , , , ,
, 
Hume, David,  n. , 
humility, –
hunger, , 
hypotheses, , 
I, , , , 
idealism/idealists, , 
ideals, , , 
ideas, –, 
modern, , , , , , , 
ignorance, , 
images, , 
immoralists/immorality, , , , 
impatience, –
independence, , , , 
India/Indians, , 
indifference, , 
individual, , 
industry/industriousness, –, , 
“in itself ”, see essence
inspiration, , 
instinct, , , –, , , , –, ,
, , ; see also herd
interest, , 
interpretation, , –, 
invention, , ; see also discovery
irony, , 
it, –, 
Italians/Italy, x, , , 
jealousy, , 
Jean Paul (Richter, Johann Paul Friedrich), ,

Jesuitism/Jesuits, , , , 
Jesus, , 
Jews/Judaism, , , , , –
judgment, , , , 
synthetic a priori, , 
justice, , , , , , , 
justiﬁcation, , , 

Kant, Immanuel, ix, xxi, , , , , , ,
 n. , , 
Kleist, Heinrich von, 
knowledge, vii, xi, xxi, xxvii, , –, –, ,
, , , , , –, , , , , ,
–, , –, , –, 
Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von,

Kundry, 
“laisser-aller”, –
Lambert, Anne Thérèse de Marguenat de
Courcelles, marquise de, 
language, , –, –, 
Latins, 
laughter, , –
law/laws, , , , , , –
primordial, , 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 
Leonardo da Vinci, 
Leopardi, Giacomo, 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 
levelers/leveling, , 
lies/lying, , , , , , 
life/living, xv–xvii, xxv, , , , , –, ,
, –, , , , –
lineage, , 
Locke, John, , 
logic/logicians, , –, , 
loss, , 
love, , , , , , , , , , , ,
, –
neighbor, , 
of enemies, 
of God, , 
of man, xxiv, , , , 
sexual, 
Luther, Martin, , , 
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 
madness, , 
malice, , 
man, xxvii, , , , , , , , , ,
, , 
scientiﬁc, , , 
Mark Brandenburg, 
marriage, , , 
Marschner, Heinrich, 
masks, –, , , , , 
masses, , , , 
masters, , , , , , 
matter, , 
means, –
mediocrity, , , , , 



Index
memory, , , , 
men, , , , , 
Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, Felix, 
Mephistopheles, 
mercy, , , 
metaphysics/metaphysicians, xi, xxvi, , , 
method, , 
Methodism, 
methodology, xxiii
Michelet, Jules, 
Mill, John Stuart, 
Minotaur, 
mistrust, , , , , , 
misunderstanding, , , , , , 
Mithras, 
moderation, , , 
modernity, xi, xvi, xxiv
modesty, , , 
Molière ( Jean-Baptiste Poquelin), 
Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de, 
moralism/moralist, , 
morals/morality, vii, xi, xiv, xv, xvi, , , , ,
–, , , , , , , , , –,
–, , –, , –, –,
–, , –, , , , ;
see also faculties, science
motion, , 
motivation/motives, , 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 
multiplicity, , 
Münchhausen, Karl Friedrich Hieronymus,
Freiherr von, 
music, , , , , , , , , ,

German, –, –
Muslims, 
Musset, Alfred de, 
name/names, , , 
Napoleon Bonaparte, French emperor, , ,
, , , , 
nation, xviii, –, , 
nature, xxv, xxvi, , , –, –
Nausicaa, 
necessity, , , 
need, , , 
negation, –
neighbor, , , , –; see also fear, love
newspapers, , , , 
Nietzsche, Friedrich
life of, ix–x
works:
The Birth of Tragedy, x,  n. 
Ecce Homo, xi, xiii

The Genealogy of Morals, xvi
Thus Spoke Zarathustra, xi–xiii, xv, xxv
nihilism, , 
nobility/noblesse, vii, xxvi–xxvii, , , ,
, , , 
numbers, , 
obedience, –, , , , , , , 
objectivity, ix, xxviii, –, 
Odysseus, , 
Oedipus, , 
opinion, , –, 
origins, –, –, 
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso),  n. 
pain, , –, , 
Paris, , , , 
parliament, , , 
Pascal, Blaise, , , , 
passions, , , 
past, the, , –
“pathos of distance,” see distance
patience, , 
peace, , 
perfection, –
“perhapses,” dangerous, xix, 
Pericles, 
Persia/Persians, 
perspectivism, vii, xiv, xx, , , , 
socio-hermeneutical dimension of, xx–xxiii
pessimism, , , , , , , 
Petronius Arbiter, –
Pharisaism, 
philologists/philology, , , 
philosophy/philosophers, vii, xvii, xix, xxiv, ,
, , , , , , , , –, ,
–, , , , , , , 
German, –, 
moral, , 
new, xix–xx, xxvi, , –, –, 
Phoenicianism, 
physicians, , 
physics/physicists, , , 
physiology/physiologists, , , , , ,

piety, xxiv, , , , , , 
pity, xxiv, , , , , , , , , ,
–, , , –, , –, ,

Plato/Platonism, xv, , –, –, , –,

pleasure, , –, , 
Poe, Edgar Allan, 
Poland/Polish, the, 



Index
politics, , , , , –, , 
Port-Royal, 
positivism/positivists, , , 
power, xxv, , , –, , , , , ,

will to, xiv, xv, xxiv–xxvi, , , , , ,
, , , , , , , 
praise, , , , 
preachers, , 
predestination, , 
prey, –
pride, , , , , 
principles, , 
privilege, , 
process, , 
profundity, –, , , 
progress, xxiv, , , , 
Protestantism, 
Proteus, 
Provence, 
proverbs, xv
Prussia/Prussians, 
psychology/psychologists, xvi, –, –,
, , , , , , 
Puritanism, , , , , 
purpose, , 
Pythagoras, 
rabble, , , , 
race, , , , 
randomness, xxiii
Raphael (Raffaelo Santi), 
rank, xxvi, , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , 
reading, –
reality, viii, xxiv, xxv, xxvi, xxvii, , –, ,
–, 
reason, , , , , –, 
reason-giving, xix n. 
religion, vii, xi, xvi, xvii, xxiv, , , , ,

religious people, , 
Renan, Ernest, 
representation, , 
resentment (ressentiment), xx n. 
respect, , , , , 
respectability, , 
responsibility, , , , , , 
revenge, , 
reverence, , 
rights, , , 
equal, , , –, , , 
Roland de la Platière, Jeanne Marie, 
Romans/Rome, , , , , 

Romanticism, , , –, , , 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, ix, 
ruin, , 
rule, , , , ; see also command,
government
Russia, , , 
Sacchetti, Franco, 
sacriﬁce, , 
Sainte-Beuve, Charles-Augustin de, 
Saint-Evremond, Charles de Marguetel de
Saint-Denis, seigneur de, 
saintliness/saints, xv, –, , 
Salvation Army, 
Samos, 
Sand, George (Dudevant, Armandine-AuroreLucie, baronne de), 
Sand, Karl Ludwig, 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, ,

Schiller, Friedrich, 
Schlosser, Johann Georg, 
scholars, , , , , , , 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, xvii, , , , , ,
, , , , , 
Schumann, Robert, 
science, xvii, xxiv, , –, , , , , ,
, , 
of morals, –; see also man, scientiﬁc
scientiﬁcity, , 
security, , 
self-control, , 
self-denial, , 
self-knowledge, , , , , 
self-interest, , 
selﬂessness, , 
self-overcoming, xxvii, , 
self-preservation, , 
self-respect, , 
self-sacriﬁce, , 
sensations, , 
senses, , , , 
sensualism/sensuality/sensuousness, ,
–, , 
severity, , , 
sex-drive, , 
sexuality, xv, , ; see also abstinence
Shakespeare, William, 
shame, , , , , , , , , , 
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 
Siegfried, 
silence, , 
simplicity/simpliﬁcation, –
sin, , 



Index
skepticism/skeptics, xxi n. , , , ,
–, –
slavery/slaves, , , , , , , , ,
, , , –
smell, , 
socialists, , , 
society, , , 
Socrates, xvii, , , –, , , 
solitude, , , , , –, , 
soul, xxvii, , , , –, , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , 
European, , 
noble, , , 
Spain, 
species, –
Spencer, Herbert, 
Sphinx, 
Spinoza, Baruch, xix n. , , , , 
spirit, , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , –, ,
, , , , 
spirituality, , , , , –, 
Staël-Holstein, Anne-Louise-Germaine de,
 n. , 
stars, , 
Stendhal (Beyle, Henri), , , 
Stoa, 
Stoics/stoicism, , , , , 
strength, , , , , 
stupidity, , , , , , , , ,
, , 
style, , –
subjectivity, ix, xxi–xxii, 
subtlety, , 
success, , 
suffering, xx n. , , , , , , –,
, , , , 
Swabians, 
Switzerland, x
Sybel, Heinrich von, 
sympathy, , , 
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius, 
tact, , 
Taine, Hippolyte, –
talent, , 
taste, , , , –, , –, –,
, , 
ancient/archaic, , 
German, , 
tension, , 
theologians/theology, xvii, , 

thinking/thought, xxvi, , , –, , ,
, , , , , , , 
Tiberius Claudius Nero, Roman emperor, 
time, , , , 
timidity, , 
toleration, –
tools, , , 
tradition, vii
tragedy, , , , –, 
translation, –
Treitschke, Heinrich Gotthard von, 
Truth/True, the, xiv, , 
truth/truths/truthfulness, vii, xi, xiii, xiv, xx,
xxi, xxii, xxiv, xxvii, xxviii, , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , 
love of, , 
theory of, xxii–xxiii
will to, , , 
Tübingen, 
tyranny/tyrants, , , , , , 
unbelief, , 
uncertainty, , 
understanding, , 
un-freedom, –, , 
unity, , 
untruth, , , , 
utilitarians/utilitarianism, , , , , ,

utility, , , 
value/values/valuations, xvii–xviii, xx n. ,
xxiv, –, , –, , , , , , ,
, , –, , , , , , ,
, , , , –
creation of, , , 
distinctions, , , 
vanity, , , , , , , –, 
variation, –
Vedanta, , 
Venice, 
violence, , , 
virtue/virtues, , , , , , , ,
, , , , 
vivisection, , , , 
Voltaire, (Arouet, François-Marie), , , ,
, 
Wagner, Richard, xi, , , , , ,
, , –
war, , , , 
weakness, xxiv



Index
Weber, Carl Maria von, 
Weiblichkeit, see femininity
“what if ” scenarios, xx
will/willing, –, , , , –, ,
, , –; see also free will,
goodwill; see also under:
power, truth
wisdom, , , , 
wishful thinking, xxiv
woman, –, 

women, x, xv, xviii, , , , , , , , ,
–, , , , –
words, , 
work, , 
world, xxvi, , , , , 
negation of, , 
worth/worthiness, xxvi, 
Wotan, 
youth, –, 



Cambridge texts in the history of philosophy
Titles published in the series thus far
Aristotle Nicomachean Ethics (edited by Roger Crisp)
Arnauld and Nicole Logic or the Art of Thinking (edited by Jill Vance
Buroker)
Bacon The New Organon (edited by Lisa Jardine and Michael Silverthorne)
Boyle A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature (edited by
Edward B. Davis and Michael Hunter)
Bruno Cause, Principle and Unity and Essays on Magic (edited by Richard
Blackwell and Robert de Lucca with an introduction by Alfonso Ingegno)
Cavendish Observations upon Experimental Philosophy (edited by Eileen O’Neill)
Cicero On Moral Ends (edited by Julia Annas, translated by Raphael Woolf )
Clarke A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God and Other Writings
(edited by Ezio Vailati)
Condillac Essay on the Origin of Human Knowledge (edited by Hans Aarsleff )
Conway The Principles of the Most Ancient and Modern Philosophy (edited by
Allison P. Coudert and Taylor Corse)
Cudworth A Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality with A
Treatise of Freewill (edited by Sarah Hutton)
Descartes Meditations on First Philosophy, with selections from the Objections
and Replies (edited by John Cottingham)
Descartes The World and Other Writings (edited by Stephen Gaukroger)
Fichte Foundations of Natural Right (edited by Frederick Neuhouser, translated
by Michael Baur)
Hobbes and Bramhall on Liberty and Necessity (edited by Vere Chappell)
Humboldt On Language (edited by Michael Losonsky, translated by Peter
Heath)
Kant Critique of Practical Reason (edited by Mary Gregor with an introduction
by Andrews Reath)
Kant Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (edited by Mary Gregor with an
introduction by Christine M. Korsgaard)
Kant The Metaphysics of Morals (edited by Mary Gregor with an introduction
by Roger Sullivan)
Kant Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (edited by Gary Hatﬁeld)

Kant Religion within the Boundaries of Mere Reason and Other Writings
(edited by Allen Wood and George di Giovanni with an introduction
by Robert Merrihew Adams)
La Mettrie Machine Man and Other Writings (edited by Ann Thomson)
Leibniz New Essays on Human Understanding (edited by Peter Remnant
and Jonathan Bennett)
Malebranche Dialogues on Metaphysics and on Religion (edited by Nicholas
Jolley and David Scott)
Malebranche The Search after Truth (edited by Thomas M. Lennon
and Paul J. Olscamp)
Melanchthon Orations on Philosophy and Education (edited by Sachiko
Kusukawa, translated by Christine Salazar)
Mendelssohn Philosophical Writings (edited by Daniel O. Dahlstrom)
Nietzsche Beyond Good and Evil (edited by Rolf-Peter Horstmann and Judith
Norman)
Nietzsche The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings (edited by Raymond Geuss
and Ronald Speirs)
Nietzsche Daybreak (edited by Maudemarie Clark and Brian Leiter, translated
by R. J. Hollingdale)
Nietzsche The Gay Science (edited by Bernard Williams, translated by Joseﬁne
Nauckhoff )
Nietzsche Human, All Too Human (translated by R. J. Hollingdale with an
introduction by Richard Schacht)
Nietzsche Untimely Meditations (edited by Daniel Breazeale, translated by
R. J. Hollingdale)
Schleiermacher Hermeneutics and Criticism (edited by Andrew Bowie)
Schleiermacher On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers (edited by
Richard Crouter)
Schopenhauer Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will (edited by Günter Zöller)
Sextus Empiricus Outlines of Scepticism (edited by Julia Annas and Jonathan
Barnes)
Shaftesbury, Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times (edited by
Lawrence Klein)
Voltaire Treatise on Tolerance and Other Writings (edited by Simon Harvey)

