01: Introduction

I. Estrangement as the Generic Mode of Exploitation
François Laruelle’s non-Marxist reading of Marx, executed in
Introduction au non-marxisme, is accomplished by allowing
Marx’s text to speak for itself, without placing it into the history
of philosophy.1 A non-philosophical reading of Marx operates
with the “use-value” of concepts that have been radicalized to
expose their unilateral correlation with the effect of the real.
In non-philosophy (also called non-standard philosophy), the
“real” is the instance of unilateral, indifferent effect of a radical
exteriority with respect to the signifying subject. In other words,
one does not refer to the abstraction of “the Real,” but rather to
concrete instances of an effect of the real, of that which always
already escapes signification but is nonetheless out there. In the
case of Marx’s science of society, the “out there” is the practice
of the workforce, the lived of wage labor as envisaged praxis of
socialist emancipation. Radical concepts are “affected by the real”;
they have “use-value” in the sense that they correlate and effect
a reality that is, as Laruelle would say, “lived” and “experienced,”
or, as Marx would say, a reality that is “physical and sensuous.”2
Philosophical recreation of Marx’s thought entails production of
“surplus value,” assuming an independent “life” and acting as if
self-sufficient reality is detached from the material real, which is
François Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2000).
2
Karl Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach,” in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
The German Ideology, trans. Roy Pascal (London: Lawrence and Wishart,
1938), available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/
theses/.

1

2 | INTRODUCTION

precisely how capitalism operates.
Following Laruelle, I argue that philosophy is constituted
in a fashion perfectly analogous to the one which grounds
capitalism—philosophy constitutes a reality in its own right and
a reality that establishes an amphibology with the real (acts in
its stead, posturing as “more real than the real”). In the split of
the physical from the real of sensations of pain and pleasure, the
detached body and mind meet in order to produce “material”
effects—an instance which we shall call “the real,” following the
terminology of non-philosophy—which constitutes estrangement
as oppression, a characteristic of both philosophy and capitalism.
Alienation is at the heart of the great (existentialist) torment of
modern Man (therefore, in some form/s, Woman’s too), the source
of spiritual and physical suffering. Its source, however, is one of
the ruses of social reason (i.e., the reason of modernity): the
illusion of philosophy and of capitalism about a self-sufficiency
and “endowment with reality” that is greater than the reality of
the real or of the material, which hasn’t been reinvented through
reason and technology.
I.1. The Real or the “Interest”
Similarly to Marx’s project of creating a science of the politicaleconomic exploitation of human labor, the non-philosophical idea
of “the science of the human” is not positivist. Marx is opposed
to philosophical materialisms of all sorts, and pleads for one
grounded in the “real interests” of humanity. Analogously, Laruelle
is radically skeptical of positivism, as it is a form of philosophical
construction of exactness rather than one determined by the real
or by immanence. Positivism is a cosmology that amphibologically
usurps the places of the real and of truth simultaneously, implying
they are one and the same thing, and, hence, interchangeable. It is
not mathematized, nor does it attempt to mathematize or quantify
by performing a mimicry of scientific procedures that pertain to
exact sciences. The sciences of or about humans, along with its
method and possible formalization of language for the sake of
exactitude, should be determined by the real in the last instance.
The exactness of its language should issue from the “syntax of the
real” (Laruelle) of subject matter in its study.
The real in non-standard Marxism—or in Marxism of nonphilosophical posture of thought—is analogous to what Marx
calls the worker’s “interest.”3 The “syntax of the real” that Laruelle
Karl Marx, “First Manuscript: Wages of Labor,” in Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 (Moscow: Progress Publishers,
1959), available at https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/
manuscripts/wages.htm.

3

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 3

argues for in Introduction au non-marxism is dictated by what
one would call “material reasons,” or reasons originating from
“the real,” from the “physical,” or from “life,” according to Marx’s
Capital. It is important to note that in the first volume of Capital,
contrary to the inertia of the doctrinal Marxian reading of the
text, Marx resorts to the notions of “the real” and “life” virtually
in all instances where we would expect to read “matter” or the
“material.” The legacy of Marxist interpretation—or simply, the
legacy of “Marxism”—has introduced a doctrine of reading the
original text by automatically and surreptitiously “translating” or
interchanging the terms “life,” “real,” and “physical,” with “matter.”
The idea of “materialism” has disciplined all possible readings of
the concepts at issue.
The direct “interest” of the workers that Marx writes about is
not an idea in the sense of “causa finalis.” It’s not a purpose. It
does not have a “meaning” per se. It does not require “wisdom,”
“superior knowledge,” or education to know what one’s interest is.
Interest is experienced, it is lived and it is the derivate of—let us put
it in Spinozian terms, the conatus to stay in life and to increase lifepower. Through physical experience and mental representation
or transposition, one knows what one’s interest is. Philosophy,
understood in Laruellian as well as in a Marxian sense, can drive
us into violating our own interests by way of replacing the real
(of life) with “truth.” In Marxian terms, “fetishism” (and not only
over commodities) can lead us to violate our immediate needs
for a fulfilled life, which consists of a general state of physical and
mental wellbeing, driving us into becoming (aspiring) capitalists.
Not much different from this aspiration is the one that conditioned
the establishment of the so-called communist societies, which
Marx anticipated in his Philosophic-Economic Manuscripts in
1844 under the name of “primitive form of communism.” It is
an aspiration of a community and it is defined by its tendency of
becoming a “universal capitalist.”4
I.2. The Fetish
The interest (Marx) or the lived (Laruelle) necessitates a response
that seeks to protect the physical from the violence brought upon it
Karl Marx, “Third Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844 (available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1844/manuscripts/third.htm): “The community is only a community of labour, and equality of wages paid out by communal capital—by
the community as the universal capitalist. Both sides of the relationship
are raised to an imagined universality—labour as the category in which
every person is placed, and capital as the acknowledged universality and
power of the community.”

4

4 | INTRODUCTION

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 4

in the name—or by the dictate—of the “fetish.” In Marx’s text, “the
fetish” equals the value of an absolute of an Idea/l, be it religious or
political. The response of the real (of “the interest” that is material,
physical, or of “the lived”) is always already political, as it is one of
either submission or rebellion. It is shaped by what Laruelle calls
“the syntax of the real,” by virtue of being conditioned by either
the physical or by some life-protecting necessity that is in the last
instance physical.
The real unavoidably seeks to be protected from the
speculations of fetishism. The philosophical doubles the instances
and oppositions that they create, i.e. matter and idea. Marxism
understood as a philosophical project aims to reclaim the real
identified with matter and emancipate it from the dictate of the
idea or of the speculative. Building on Marx’s texts, Marxism is a
materialist philosophical project. The ambitions of Marx’s texts,
including the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844
and Capital, are minimally philosophical. They are characterized
by the tendency to constitute a science in its own right, a science
that is determined by its ambition to do away with philosophy.
Laruelle’s own project is founded on the exact same objective.
Nonetheless, its defining specificities make of it a project that
builds, albeit not solely, on some of Marx’s own commitments.
Both projects are by proclamation scientific, but not so in the
sense of mannerist mimicry of exact sciences. They are scientific
in the sense that they are the result of an exhaustive and systematic
description of processes that are an inalienable and constitutive
part of an experienced, i.e., “physical” or “sensuous,” reality. For
a human reality to be real, or to constitute a certain real for the
subject of knowledge, it has to hold the status of an exteriority
with respect to the thought that seeks to explain it.
To consider a reality subject to theoretical or scientific
investigation as “objective” means to ascribe to it a meaning and to
subject it to that meaning—to conflate it with it, and reduce it to it.
The same goes for “material,” as materialism is still a philosophical
project, in spite of Marx’s attempt to create a materialist science
beyond or outside of philosophy. Positivism and materialism
equate truth with reality; through this equation it establishes a
neutralization of the real by instituting the “truth” of it as a higher
form of reality. Such tendencies resemble the infantile mimetic
impulse of creating a real that is more real than the real itself.
According to Laruelle, science is defined precisely by it not being
“spontaneous.” The argument of the “human-in-human” in nonphilosophy, or how the human in the last instance is marked by its
linguistic insufficiency, implies that there is a continuity between
common sense, or everyday man’s and woman’s language, and that
of science. “Human-in-human” (homme-en-homme) refers to the
kernel of the real in the human that precedes the lingual and the

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 5

subjectivization as the product of language (or transcendence, in
non-philosophical vocabulary). This concept has been elaborated
in a most detailed way in Laruelle’s Théorie des Etrangers: Science
des hommes, démocratie et non-psychanalyse (1995).5
Nonetheless, science is defined by the break from the “humanin-human,” while it remains on the same continuum of signification.
I.3. The Question of “Philosophical Amphibology”
Science, in the sense of non-philosophy or non-standard
philosophy, is a method conditioned by the object of study that is
a “real object.” Being an “object”—albeit “real” as in “affected by
immanence”—it is fundamentally a postulation. It is a quadruple
postulation of “reality, exteriority, stability and unity,” writes
Laruelle.6 Also, non-philosophically speaking, the object of
scientific study is necessarily a one even when the final goal is to
explain a complexity consisting of multiple elements. It is exterior
to thought because it cannot be subsumed by it, and doesn’t relate
to it in any way in spite of the fact that thought unilaterally relates
to the object of study. It is “stable,” since what one scientifically
seeks to explain is an identity in the last instance.7 In this way,
thought establishes a non-circular relation with the Real, without
a reciprocal determination, which causes that cognition subjects
itself to the real, rather than the other way around.8 A rigor in
description is what characterizes science’s elimination of any
auto-referentiality, explains Laruelle in Intoduction au nonmarxisme. A scientific description of scientific praxis then, as
Laruelle undertakes in Théorie des identités, presents us with the
quadruple postulation of an object of scientific investigation.
The descriptiveness of science is determined by its ambition
to identify and explain the effects of the real, or what could be
termed empiric processes, without empiricism. Scientific postures
of thought seek to describe with language that which is exterior
to language, without being encumbered with the pretensions to
stipulate a universe of meaning. This permits the possibility of
a radical fragmentation of knowledge. To stipulate and institute
a universe of meaning is the characteristic of the philosophical
mode of thinking. This means that they are characteristic of any
5
François Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers: Science des hommes, démocratie
et non-psychanalyse (Paris: Éditions Kimé, 1995).
6
François Laruelle, Théorie des identités (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1992), 92.
7
Laruelle, Théorie des identités, 92-93.
8
François Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2000).

6 | INTRODUCTION

philosophy because they are the determination in the last instance
of the philosophical.
I.4. Laruelle’s “Scientific”
The objections directed against Laruelle’s alleged generalization
or reductionism of philosophy, when he speaks of ‘philosophy’ as
if it were a monolithic and fixed phenomenon, are based on the
claim that philosophy is essentially heterogeneous and diverse.
This claim about philosophy’s essential heterogeneity implies
that there is a generic determination of philosophy. It implies
there is a criterion according to which different teachings and
writings in different historical periods can be named or identified
as “philosophy.” Laruelle’s claim about philosophy’s sufficiency
and its immanent tendency for establishing circular relation with
reality is his criterion for placing forms of thought and writing
under the category of “philosophy.” Since, according to Laruelle,
the amphibology of thought, the real, and thought’s self-sufficiency
determine philosophy in the last instance, one can speak of
philosophy in a scientific theory or a theological doctrine, but not
necessarily of the philosophy canonically identified as such.
Consequently, Laruelle’s reference to “the philosophy” is not a
generalization of something that has been identified as philosophy
according to criteria other those inherent to the non-philosophy.
“The philosophy,” according to non-philosophy, is anything whose
determination in the last instance is a circular reciprocity between
thought and the real, whereby the latter undergoes subsumption
by the former. Scientific method is defined by terms that are
themselves non-philosophical, and is affected and determined in
the last instance by the praxis of science. It is according to this
definition, without any reference to the philosophy of science or
epistemology, which I shall refer to the notion of the scientific.
Also, my identification of Marx’s method in Capital as scientific is
established according to the non-philosophical conceptualization
of the scientific—not according to the doctrine of dialectical
materialism or any other philosophical doctrine. I believe this
usage of the term coincides with Marx’s own understanding of the
notion of “science” as determined by praxis rather than philosophy
or “abstraction.”
I.5. Marx’s “Scientific”
Marx’s method, conditioned by “the real,” corresponds with the
concept of a “real object” in non-standard philosophy, in that it
identifies, describes, and explains the social-economic foundations
of capitalism and the laws of functioning of the capitalist reality.
On the basis of this acquired knowledge, a political vision is

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 7

created. It is a vision that seeks to abolish subjection produced
through alienation. The alienation at issue is (at least) threefold:
one is alienated from one’s labor, one is alienated from the fruits
of one’s labor, and finally, one is alienated from the physicality of
one’s life by subjecting them to the rule of an idea.
Following Laruelle, let us observe the syntax of the real as
conditioned by the posture of thought which observes, describes,
and explains the effects-in-the-real of the material reality of
such alienation. By following the effects of the real on a thinking
subject, this posture of thought carries out a rigorous description,
thereby constituting a syntax of the real. Only thereafter does the
non-philosophical or scientific posture of thought resort to the
morphology and semantics originating in the “transcendental
material” (language and philosophical concepts). In this manner,
the source of the problem (i.e. of alienation) is explained, and a
solution to it is presented. The proposed solution assumes the
form of a response to the raised problem, a response that consists
of the attempt to invent societal and economic models that would
abolish or radically diminish the alienation in question. It stems
from the problem of surplus value.
Surplus value is what grounds capitalist logic and enables its
progressive, and ultimately out of joint, detachment from the
material/real embodied by the sense and experience of need,
termed by Marx as “interest.”9 This exchange, which is in its last
instance a circular movement where money is exchanged for more
money, is expressed in the formula M-C-M—the axiom of Marx’s
Capital. M-C-M establishes an endless cycle that takes on a life
of its own. It exploits that which has use value: material objects
that are turned into a commodity, or any object of human labor
or nature that serves the needs for survival and a “spiritually and
physically” fulfilled life.
With this division of labour on the one hand and the accumulation
of capital on the other, the worker becomes ever more exclusively
dependent on labour, and on a particular, very one-sided,
machine-like labour at that. Just as he is thus depressed spiritually
and physically to the condition of a machine and from being a
man becomes an abstract activity and a belly, so he also becomes
ever more dependent on every fluctuation in market price.10

Commodification of labor drives any subject to the logic of
M-C-M (not only the exploited, but also the exploiter) to a greater
Marx, “First Manuscript: Wages of Labor,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
11
Marx, “First Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
10

8 | INTRODUCTION

alienation from the reality of her/his life as “sensuous” (Marx).
Alienation or abstraction, which Marx identifies as the main
source (or perhaps, the essence itself) of exploitation is not the
same as transcendence in non-philosophy.
I.6. Transcendence, Alienation and Philosophically
Impoverished Metaphysics
Marx argues that transcendence of the bare reality of a wage
laborer’s life, of the vulnerable exposure to exploitation of a life
reduced to labor force, is the main goal of human economic and
social emancipation. Let us consider the following quote from
Marx’s Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts 1844:
Communism as the positive transcendence of private property as human self-estrangement, and therefore
as the real appropriation of the human essence by and for
man; communism therefore as the complete return of man
to himself as a social (i.e., human) being—a return accomplished consciously and embracing the entire wealth of
previous development. This communism, as fully developed naturalism, equals humanism, and as fully developed
humanism equals naturalism; it is the genuine resolution
of the conflict between man and nature and between man
and man—the true resolution of the strife between existence and essence, between objectification and self-confirmation, between freedom and necessity, between the individual and the species. Communism is the riddle of history
solved, and it knows itself to be this solution.11
This indicates that the communist project is not just
about economic emancipation of the “human species” from
its objectification as a labor force. Its goal is, evidently, also
metaphysical, as communism is the “genuine resolution of
the conflict between man and nature and between man and
man,” accomplished through “transcendence of […] human
estrangement.”
The goal of transcending the alienation of man from nature is
metaphysical, since its concern is one involving the reconciliation
of realities that depend on a reconciliation of concepts. Although
the concepts at stake are philosophical categories—that is to say,
they are presented to us philosophically, either through theology
or through the political theology of modernity—the goal consists
in transcending philosophy. Therefore, what we will term here
Marx, “Third Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.

12

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 9

“the metaphysical goal of Marxism” (or of Marxist communism
and socialism), is in fact a “transcendentally impoverished metaphysics.” The procedure of “transcendental impoverishment”
is developed as part of Laruelle’s non-philosophical method of
theorizing with “philosophical material” by ridding its concepts of
the philosophical principles of sufficiency.
This is its [philosophy’s] fundamental autopositioning,
that which one could also call its autofactualization or its
autofetishization—all that we assemble under the principle
of sufficient philosophy (PPS).12
Marx argues that “alienation” is the product of philosophy,
or the product of abstraction’s domination and silencing of the
“physical and sensuous” (the real and praxis). Thus, his project
decidedly consists in transcending or exiting philosophy.13
However, the proposal for the reconciliation of the mutually
estranged notions and realities of “nature” and “man” posits
questions as overwhelming as why is the universe created and as
stubborn as why is there death, or is there a God? These questions are
not necessarily philosophical. They are, nonetheless, metaphysical.
They might be scientifically or logically meaningless, but this
does not make them less relevant or meaningless. They can be
addressed through religion but also through psychoanalysis. Also,
I would argue, they can be tackled realistically from a certain point
with the “science of the humans” that Laruelle seeks to establish,
which can be constructed with the “transcendental material” of
philosophy while remaining in the last instance determined by the
real. In his Introduction au Non-Marxisme, Laruelle proposes the
model for such science:
If it [non-Marxism] would seem to go back there [to Marxism],
it would be more to its problems rather than to its texts, and to
problems whose solution implies treating the texts as symptoms,
by way of suspension of the philosophical authority. [...] It
is impossible, even in Freud and in Marx, and even more so
within a philosophy, to find radical concepts of the Real and the
universal—solely the unconscious and the productive forces, desire
and labor. As soon as one arrives to this discovery, psychoanalysis
and Marxism gain one utterly new sense—a transformation of
their theories into simple material [...] These sorts of disciplines
13
François Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie (Liege: Pierre Mardaga, 1989), 17.
14
Karl Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in
Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, available at https://
www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/comm.htm.

10 | INTRODUCTION

require more than just a simple theoretical transformation—a
discovery from within a “non-” that would be the effect (of) the
Real or its action.14
The metaphysical questions raised in Marx’s texts can be
tackled through a posture of thought that is informed by the
materialist tendency of transcending philosophy, a task Marx set
for himself and for socialism. In its ambitions, Marx’s materialism
is fundamentally non-philosophical, as we can learn from his
Theses on Feuerbach15 and Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy in General.16
Estrangement is seen as the material fact of alienation of the
worker from his or her work: it is a process that does not belong
to him or her. Hence, there is absence of a sense of familiarity.
Not belonging to what one is most engaged to, the impossibility to
claim this process as one’s own labor (insofar it is waged) causes
a sense of radical estrangement that is experienced as suffering of
the body and soul.
Not being at home with one’s own immediate and constant
activity, a state expressed primarily through the status of “a
worker,” is as painful as it is dispossessing to one’s sense of
selfhood. This is a form of violence that is specific to humankind.
Marx’s communism is essentially a humanist project. For the same
reason, Laruelle declares his project of non-philosophy as one
of “the sciences of the human.” Let us note, Marx and Laruelle’s
humanism is not philosophical as they are seen respectively as
scientific projects based on the gesture of “an exit from philosophy”
(Marx) or a stance of a “non” with respect to philosophy that steps
out from “philosophy’s sufficiency” (Laruelle).
Marx insists on the communist model or goal of liberation
as one founded in the “real,” “physical,” or “natural” experience
of estrangement. The estrangement Marx writes about is not the
same as the estrangement that existentialists have written about, as
it does not deal with the question of meaning or meaninglessness
of life. It does not discover the “absurd” as simultaneously the real
and the truth of human existence, or estrangement as its essence.
Quite to the contrary, estrangement is far from being the essence of
human existence; it is what deprives humanity from “realization”
of its essence that is rooted in the “physical,” “natural,” and “the
15
François Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2000), 61.
16
Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach,” in Marx and Engels, The German Ideology.
17
Karl Marx, “Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy in General,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, available at https://www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/hegel.htm..
.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 11

real.” Estrangement is experienced or lived—in Laruellian terms
it is the instance of the lived (le vecu)—as trauma, and is a form of
oppression by virtue of the sheer experience of inflicted violence
and pain that it causes to the human “body” and “spirit.”
II. Commodity Fetishism and the Speculative Mind
as Two Faces of the Same Mode of Oppression and
Exploitation
II.1. Alienation of Labor through Abstraction
The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse
materiality of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into
its composition.
–Karl Marx, Capital

Marx unmasks the complete lack of materiality as the condition for
determination in the last instance of commodity qua commodity.
The product of human labor assumes the status of a commodity
only when it is absolutely detached from its physicality.
There is a physical relation between physical things. But it
is different with commodities. There, the existence of the
things quâ commodities, and the value relation between
the products of labour which stamps them as commodities,
have absolutely no connection with their physical
properties and with the material relations arising. 17
The production and exchange of commodities is grounded
in an estrangement from the physical. The estrangement first
takes place in the form of the exploitation of human labor as
physicality, and in a second gesture, by way of entering the endless
(or circular) chain of exchange of values, it assumes the status of a
commodity. Abstraction as the determination in the last instance
of all commodities, and of the circulation of the commodity as
(surplus) pure value is enabled by the exploitation of human labor,
which, in its turn, is always physical.
The mystical character of commodities does not originate,
therefore, in their use value. Just as little does it proceed
from the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in
Karl Marx, “The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof,” in
Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. I: The Process
of Production of Capital, ed. Frederick Engels, trans. Samuel Moore and
Edward Aveling (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1887), available at http://
www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch01.htm#S4.
18

12 | INTRODUCTION

the first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour,
or productive activities, may be, it is a physiological fact,
that they are functions of the human organism, and that
each such function, whatever may be its nature or form,
is essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves,
muscles, &c.18
It seems that exploitation is in essence unavoidably fetishistic,
as it is the effect of abstraction directed against the physical.
Immediate needs that are expressed in and satisfied through the
so-called use-value of a product are in the last instance physical,
especially when they primarily concern the “mind” (or brain and
nerves). Only if these physical needs are sacrificed, and if they
become subject to the holocaust of speculation (economic but also
philosophical), is commodity created, and with it the possibility of
surplus value.
A close reading of most of Marx’s seminal texts disclose a
repeated and consistent stance, according to which exploitation
is always already carried out by the instance of the speculative
and the abstract against the physical, or the real or material (all
three terms are used by Marx interchangeably). This argument is
the core of his critique of fetishism. It is also, I would argue, the
grounding epistemic position of his entire oeuvre. All questions
that do not depart from the real of existence, or simply from
the lived, are ill posed and lead toward speculation based on the
procedure of abstraction.
Your question is itself a product of abstraction. Ask yourself
how you arrived at that question. Ask yourself whether
your question is not posed from a standpoint to which
I cannot reply, because it is wrongly put. Ask yourself
whether that progress as such exists for a reasonable mind.
When you ask about the creation of nature and man, you
are abstracting, in so doing, from man and nature. You
postulate them as non-existent, and yet you want me to
prove them to you as existing. Now I say to you: Give up
your abstraction and you will also give up your question.19
The “material” that Marx invokes as the authority in the last
instance of every operation of thought, which seeks to establish
accurate knowledge about the reality, is “material” insofar as it is
“physical,” “sensuous,” and “real.” It is unequivocally stated so in
Marx, “The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof,” in Marx,
Capital, Vol. 1.
20
Marx, “Third Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
19

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 13

Marx’s first thesis on Feuerbach:
The chief defect of all hitherto existing materialism—
that of Feuerbach included—is that the thing, reality,
sensuousness, is conceived only in the form of the object
or of contemplation, but not as a sensuous human activity,
practice, not subjectively. Hence, in contradistinction to
materialism, the active side was developed abstractly by
idealism—which, of course, does not know real, sensuous
activity as such.20
Human activity, particularly human subjectivity, is not
reducible to physical activity. In the above quote Marx resorts
to such terms as “the thing,” “reality,” and “practice,” as different
names for the same referent. Physicality only vouches that the
object of cognition is not an abstraction: that it is anchored in the
real.
II.2. The Status of Materialism in Marx’s Realism
Marx unequivocally states in his Theses on Feuerbach that he does
not place materialism as an idea in the history of philosophy.
What Marx argues for is a particular kind of materialism that is
not philosophical, the product of operations of abstraction, or one
that is detached or oppositional to the physical. Rather, he strives
to create a science of humanity’s “species-being” that is determined
in the last instance by the immediacy of an experienced reality.
Countering and transcending the experience of suffering caused
by alienation (the latter being caused by abstraction) is the goal
that Marx’s political project seeks to attain. Materialism is merely
a form of realism for Marx; he argues it only insofar as it departs
from “the thing”21 and the “sensuous human activity, practice.”22
The antithesis between matter and idea here is also one imposed
by abstract contemplation. The goal of humanity then, according
to Marx, should be emancipation from all forms of oppression
and subjugation. This depends on the abolishment of antitheses
established by the “abstract” or “false consciousness.” It can be
accomplished by rooting thought in practice, or in the real.
We see how subjectivity and objectivity, spirituality and
Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach,” in Marx and Engels, The German Idealism.
22
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
23
Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach,” in Marx and Engels, The German Idealism.

21

14 | INTRODUCTION

materiality, activity and suffering, lose their antithetical
character, and—thus their existence as such antitheses only
within the framework of society; we see how the resolution of
the theoretical antitheses is only possible in a practical way,
by virtue of the practical energy of man. Their resolution is
therefore by no means merely a problem of understanding,
but a real problem of life, which philosophy could not solve
precisely because it conceived this problem as merely a
theoretical one.23
The chief concern of Marxism is ensuring realism, for thought
and the body, rather than materialism. Transcending intraindividual and inter-individual alienation is—Marx puts very
explicitly—about abolishing the opposition between “spirituality”
and “materiality.” The opposition itself—for the “antithesis”—is
“merely a theoretical one.” The use of the “theoretical” here has
the same function as that of “philosophy” in Laruelle’s nonstandard philosophy. This binary logic, which is defined by the
opposition between an instance that only can be a product of
cognitive operation, and an instance that is a cognitive product
nonetheless, is determined by the real and only can be the product
of philosophy. In other words, the postulation of “the Idea” or
“the Spirit,” and the postulation of its opposite, i.e., “the matter”
or “materiality,” is the result of philosophical reasoning that is
determined in the last instance by “theory” rather than practice
or the real.
II.3. Marx’s Theory and Laruelle’s Philosophy
In non-standard philosophy, the term “theory” refers to thought’s
transcendental substratum, which can be rid of philosophy or
of the authority of philosophy through determination in the last
instance of a purported truth. There is a perfect parallel between
Marx’s use of “theory,” for which he also often uses synonyms like
“philosophy,” “abstraction,” and “speculation,” and Laruelle’s use
of the term “philosophy.” Marx argues for a materialism that will
not be philosophical in the last instance, but rather one that will
cause the meaning of the term to vanish.
[...] we see how consistent naturalism or humanism
is distinct from both idealism and materialism, and
constitutes at the same time the unifying truth of both. We
see also how only naturalism is capable of comprehending
Marx, “Third Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.

24

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 15

the action of world history.24
The disappearance of the term will be the product of the
abolishing of the opposition that determines it. The opposition
will be “abolished” by the submission of both terms to the
authority of the real, which determines each of them in their own
right as instances of the real. “Spirituality,” or a “spiritually fulfilled
life,” is the goal of the socialist and communist idea, writes Marx.
Thus it is spirituality that is experienced, lived, and materialized as
sensuous or real. Hence, its opposition to the material is obsolete.
Marx explains that socialism or communism seeks to reverse this
reality:
With this division of labour on the one hand and the
accumulation of capital on the other, the worker becomes
ever more exclusively dependent on labour, and on a
particular, very one-sided, machine-like labour at that.
Just as he is thus depressed spiritually and physically [my
emphasis] to the condition of a machine and from being
a man becomes an abstract activity and a belly, so he
also becomes ever more dependent on every fluctuation
in market price, on the application of capital, and on the
whim of the rich.25
The “spiritual depression” only can be overcome by
transcending and abolishing the human’s “condition of a machine,”
which happens when someone or something becomes “an abstract
activity and a belly.” Spiritually and physically exuberant life is
possible only if ideas are a part of and made from human praxis,
forming a sense of “being real” and making one “feel real” and
integral (without the division between “abstract activity and a
belly”). Realistically (in the materialist mode according to Marx),
a postulated question or concept is determined unilaterally by one
instance—the instance of the real.
II.4. The Real of Joy and Suffering according to Marx
and Laruelle
Enjoyment and suffering no longer establish opposition. They are
both instances of the lived, of the sheer experience that takes place
as “suffering,” in the etymological sense of the Latin word passio.
One is subjected to a sensation, be it pleasure or pain, which takes
Marx, “Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy in General,” in Marx, Economic
and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
26
Marx, “First Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.

25

16 | INTRODUCTION

place in the defenseless body through the instance of pure exposure
and vulnerability. Similarly, Laruelle’s “the lived” is called le joui,
regardless of whether it is the product of the infliction of pain or
pleasure. “It is the undivided (of) pain—yet not determined by
it—as the undivided lived of joy, but never their synthesis, not
even immanent.”26 The unilateral, mute instance of the lived in
Marx’s text is called suffering, regardless of whether it is the result
of violence or a sensation of pleasure.
[...] the object is the manifestation of the human reality, [...]
it is human activity and human suffering, for suffering,
humanly considered, is a kind of self-enjoyment of man.27
Suffering is self-enjoyment, not because of some vague
masochistic inclination, but because it represents a surpassed
alienation. Pain situates us in the real of ourselves. The real is the
instance one inhabits prior to any “making sense out of it”—in
anteriority vis-à-vis language—it precedes any possibility of
abstraction (including that of “abstract activity and a belly”).
Laruelle’s “joui sans jouissance” is one of the “first names” of the
real that we all are in the last instance.28 It is the enjoyed, without
the idea of “enjoyment,” without conceptualization or a philosophy
of enjoyment, without attaching it any sort of value.
That invasion of sensation, whether undergone as pain or
pleasure, is suffering since it entails unmitigated exposure. Without
the subject of language that transforms it into representation,
phantasm, or idea/l, it is helpless passivity. Nonetheless, if the
lingual subject introduces abstraction to the extent of causing a
sense of estrangement from the real that we are, or the bundle of
sensations that each of are in the last instance, we are subjugated
and repressed, since we are detached from our most immediate
physical needs. Abstraction or self-subjugation by philosophy is
the only means through which we can become accomplices in our
own subjugation from others.
According to Laruelle’s non-standard psychoanalysis operating
with the “transcendental material” of Lacan’s psychoanalysis—
the instance of the “Stranger” (or the process of estrangement
as pre-subjectivization) is unavoidable and necessary in order
to mediate the traumatic immediacy of the real. Laruelle says
“The Strangers are radical subjectivities”, rather than “persons,
individuals or subjects in the technical transcendental sense of the
Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers, 225.
Marx, “Third Manuscript,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
29
Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers, 222.

27
28

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 17

word.”29 Laruelle’s Stranger is made of “transcendental material”
since it is a form of subjectivity, or the product of language
(regardless of how transcendentally minimal). Nonetheless, it
also is radical since it is experienced as a “point of exteriority” at
the heart of the real. Unlike Lacan’s barred Subject, the radical
subjectivity viz. the Stranger, (as defined by Laruelle), possesses
a “concrete body” or “flesh,” one consisting of the “multitudes of
transcendental material.”30 Thus, the experience of estrangement,
which is an instance of suffering that takes place through the real
that we are, must not be erased through a double abstraction—
i.e. an abstraction of and alienation from the pre-subjective and
the founding experience of estrangement (of subjectivity). The
process of alienation from the immediacy of the real—through
the instance of the Stranger or radical subjectivity—introduces the
trauma of the foundational split. The pain of that unavoidable split
is inalienable; it takes place in or as the real.
If recognized as a dyad that is constituted by thought’s unilateral
position with respect to the real and by the indifferent (to thought)
unilaterality of the real, and if this dyad is radically determined as
such, the instance of alienation remains an exteriority. To radically
determine the dyad as such and think it and its constitutive
elements in terms of this radicalization is to perform an act of
dualysis, which is the founding methodological gesture of nonphilosophy and/or non-standard philosophy. In that way, thought
is not collapsed into and surreptitiously identified with the real of
the pain that is caused by the experience of auto-alienation viz. the
primordial split. Dualysis, in Laruelle’s terminology, is a procedure
of unilateral affirmation of the dyad.31 The non-abstractionist (or
non-philosophical) recognition of the grounding alienation of the
Self should affirm radical alienation without the gesture of selfmirroring that would produce its philosophical double.
II.5. Wage Labor as Abstraction or as the Product of
Philosophy
The abstract value of a commodity or work as wage labor is the
product of philosophical procedure. According to the logic of wage
30
Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers, 166 : “Concrètement les Etrangers ne
sont pas des personnes, des individus ou des sujets au sens philosophique
transcendant de ces mots; ce sont bien de toute façon des subjectivités
radicales, mais en dernière instance; et ce qui leur tien lieu de corps—de
corps transi par cette subjectivité—, est de l’ordre de ces entités sans différence et tissées dans la transcendance du vide.”
31
Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers, 166: “On peut appeler ‘chair’ les Multitudes transcendantales=X … .”
32
Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie, 93–95.

18 | INTRODUCTION

labor, “meaning” and signification establish an amphibology with the
real—they act in its stead while still pretending to re-present it—and
in a subterfuge movement of thought establish absolute authority
over it. This would be a Laruellian definition of “the philosophical.”
Unlike the pretensions of scientific thought that describe and explain
the workings of an instance of the real, philosophy seeks to represent the real with totality, without a remainder, to reflect it fully.
However, the unruly real does not possess the qualities of a logically
or metaphysically consistent system or doctrine. Therefore, instead
of describing it and explaining it as an exteriority, philosophical
thought engulfs the real either with the modern and pre-modern
philosophical claim of total reflection of the real, or through the
postmodern abolition of the real by its declaration as “obsolete.”
It is declared “obsolete” insofar as it is assigned the status of the
“unthinkable” (in a Lacanian, deconstructivist, and postmodernist
sense). Thus, the real is declared “meaningless,” and as such, an
irrelevant subject for social theory in the academically established
disciplines of the humanities. How we construct the realities of our
existence has become the only epistemologically relevant question
in the era of poststructuralism.
II.6. Linguistic Realities are “An Out There” in the Financial
and Philosophical Capitalism of Today
Following Marx’s critique of alienation through abstraction and
Laruelle’s philosophically non-standard recuperation of the real, my
claim is that the theoretical investigation of the modes of lingual
construction of our realities should be conducted in a way so those
realities are affirmed as exteriority (i.e., instances of the real in their own
right). It is indispensible to do so in order to arrive to the possibility
of overcoming the dictatorship of speculation in contemporary
financial capitalism, postmodern theory, and politics (translated
into concrete policies affecting the lives of concrete individuals).
The linguistic delineation of the horizon of political possibility
establishes a conditional limit and defines the size and the topology of
the politically thinkable. The delineated topos is not an instantiation
of “the transcendental imagination” in Kantian sense. Quite on the
contrary, it is an exteriority and an instance of the real because it is
not the product of the autonomous and sovereign subject, but the
deployment of a complex reality affected by the real of materiality
and physicality (as an aspect of the social), which is by definition
the product of a linguistically mediated real.
The real is not necessarily a physical exteriority. Rather, it is an
exteriority that is outside the reach of our linguistic intervention,
appropriation, and re-invention. The real is an effect that is experienced
as violence (as the implacable limit to our signifying automatism),
as a linguistically non-negotiable limitation, and as what Lacan

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 19

would call the tuché that happens to the (signifying) automaton
in the form of trauma. This instance is the concept of capital and
the material and immaterial realities that it creates. The ideology
of capitalism stipulates the possibility of any reality we can inhabit
and imagine. Therefore, the exteriority that holds the status of the
real is not necessarily physical. Moreover, the real is not necessarily
exterior since it can be an internally experienced limit/ation to the
subject’s signifying pretensions.

2: The Possibility of Immanent Revolt
as Theory and Political Praxis

I. Immanence of Revolt
The only way to immanently revolt against the world is in the
non-abstract. Revolting against concrete occurrences of subjugation and violence, rather than in the name of abstraction and
in visions of world transformation, is political action affected by
immanence. I would argue that immanence is also action determined by interests which are real and sensuous (or material), rather than abstract or philosophical. According to Marx, as discussed
in the previous chapter, abstraction itself is what ought to be combated when one resists capitalism. A communist or Marxist socialist strives toward the creation of a world in consonance with
the real or the material and immediate exigency. Laruelle would
say that the world would always be made of philosophy, and that
it would always already persecute the human in human (l’homme-en-homme). The permanent process of the democratic transformation of society, as envisaged by Marx, should be determined
by real interests rather than abstraction. The goal would be that
the world becomes a more just and happy place, one where persecution is minimalised by virtue of the reversed hierarchy between
philosophy and the real, where the former would succumb to the
dictate of the latter.
Revolt is immanent when it is determined in the last instance
by the lived of revolt, not by acting as a transcendental moral or
political decision or reacting against another moral or political
vision. The experience of revolt void of philosophy precedes language—and therefore also transcendence. The revolt in question

22 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

is not temporal, and its independence from the linguistic does
not imply a metaphysically construed separate universe. The
purely experiential or the lived revolt can be caused by the act of
language which inflicts violence, whose reaction is rebellion that
is an instantiation of conatus. As Spinoza expouds in Ethics, activity which increases life is the result of conatus, revolt, and the
struggle that aims to maintain or intensify life by combating the
life-decreasing activity of the body-mind suffered by an external
or internal source of violence. Transforming violence into a law,
into a “making sense” and the assumption of the position that accommodates the violence from one part of humanity over another, is what alienates one from suffering and joy. The function that
enables the alienating operation of socio-economic repression is
abstraction. Abstraction finds its purest form in capitalism—in
the universe of pure speculation as the source of material domination and an absolute domination over the material.
The immanent rebellion that François Laruelle writes about
consists in “ the struggle without a goal,” which is always already
present in every human (not the human subject but the real of
human, or in Laruelle’s vocabulary, “the human-in-human”). It is
without a goal because its only source and tendency is to protect
itself from violence through alienation; this defense of the human-in-human is determined by radical vulnerability.
[...] to struggle in an immanent way with the World, this
is the theorem of the Future Christ. In the beginning was
the struggle, and the struggle was with the World and the
World did not know it [...] That is rebellion, its reasons and
cause.1
Any political struggle that stems from the dictate of immanent
rebellion is determined in this way. The struggle is one of radical
singularity, but this does not mean that it cannot establish solidarity or that it is individualistic. On the contrary, it is pre-subjective
whereas individualism presupposes subjectivity. The lived experience of vulnerability and struggle can be an experience of a collective, an experience that can be mute, pre-lingual, or radically solitary, insofar as it is only the witnesses of the experience that can
communicate internally and according to the syntax of the real of
what took place. The protestors of Istanbul in the summer of 2013
were faced with the challenge to formulate their political goals and
convey the philosophical (or political) decision which determined
their struggle, whereas the only truth they knew was “what took
place” at Gezi park and the massive solidarity that it sparked. The
1
François Laruelle, Future Christ: A Lesson in Heresy, trans. Anthony Paul
Smith (London/New York: Continuum, 2010), 4.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 23

brutality that Erdogan’s government demonstrated was the reason
for the demand that he leave office. Only then could the protestors
define a political agenda that was still not philosophical—one determined not by ideology, but the concrete demands dictated by
experienced reality. Revolt took place, struggle against institutionalized violence rose, and the sheer experience of revolt-struggle
proffered the foundation which created a political agenda:
In order to clarify the stakes and the limits of rebellion we
pose the problem outside of philosophical bad habits. Philosophy is always indifferent to man or, though this isn’t
very different, too quickly compassionate. Sufferings and
alienation exist in the necessity of revolt and one concludes
from this that there is evil, and often evils, there too. Revolts are only ‘logical’ in this way—admirable vicious circle
of uncertainty and the contingency of a desired rebellion in
which no one believes.2
It is necessary that rebellion seems credible. Credibility implies planned steps toward achieving a goal that is determined by
a philosophical decision (about “what and how the world should
be”). The resistance to what inflicts subjugation is carried out from
a vulnerable position by those who are determined in the last instance to be “persecuted.”
The theory of Future Christ makes of the being-murdered
and the being-persecuted a universal but real criteria of the
manifestation of Life rather than an absurd condition of
historical fact.3
Life is conditioned by a sense of being persecuted, which
brings forth immanence or the inevitability of revolt and struggle.
Persecution is caused by “the world,” which in Laruelle’s terminology is analogous to philosophy—the universe of meaning.4
Laruelle, Future Christ, 6.
Laruelle, Future Christ, 6.
4
The concept of the “world” as analogous to that of “philosophy” is developed throughout the entire opus of Laruelle. For the sake of illustration, let us consider the following quote from François Laruelle and Anne-Françoise Schmid’s “L’identité sexuée,” Identities : Journal of Politics,
Gender and Culture 2.3 (2003) : 55: “Le problème du rapport des sexes au
génie pourrait être également déplacé. Dans son interpretation ‘philosophique’ habituelle, il postule la capacité de vivre en son proper destin le
destin du Monde et donc se jouer des contraires et de se les donner librement. C’est la faculté de se donner le Monde et le sentiment d’être pour lui
plutôt qu’en lui. La-femme passe son énergie dans le Monde, puisqu’elle
en assure la stabilité. Le Monde, dessiné par les structures de la philoso2

3

24 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

The universe of meaning is necessarily a universe of normality
and orthodoxy. The immanent struggle or the human-in-human,
determined by the immanence of struggle, is foundationally in
revolt against orthodoxy and the world. The human-in-human in
the last instance is a heretic. On the other hand, the world seeks to
control him and her by subjugating them through abstraction that
controls, moulds, violates the lived (le vécu, as Laruelle terms it),
and acts in its stead.
II. The World as Persecution
In human beings there is ‘a something’ of a radically outside-nature, and the World is a fundamental will that persecutes this
heresy.
- François Laruelle, Future Christ

Nature is part of the world, and thus is a creation of orthodoxy.
Let us utilize Judith Butler’s terminology in order to explain: Nature is always already a product of the imaginary, upon whose edifice norms and normality are erected. The immanent rebellion is
rooted in humanity’s realization of the lack of immanence in any
norm, the norm’s coercive ruse of posturing as a law of nature, and
in the society that conforms with nature as the underlying truth of
all existence. As Laruelle and Schmid put it,
Man-in-person is not an empire within the empire of the
World but is that from whom the Real takes precedent
above those empires that persecute him and who, turning
himself into a victim, confesses to his being-human in spite
of them. By a decision of an axiomatic kind, we therefore
place the protestations of rational sufficiency and the belief
in philosophical and theological opinion between parentheses. We posit that the ethics of transcendence, as much
as those of the immanence of the happy life, belong to the
World, that the religions of the Book, just as the others, are
religions of the death-World.5
Man-in-person, or subjectivity affected by immanence, is not
a universe in its own right. The liberal myth of individual’s sancphie, peut être lui aussi transformé, en ce sens qu’il n’est pas nécessaire
de se le donner dans son unité ni sa totalité. Il y faut une généralisation
de la philosophie, sa transformation en matériau. Le génie pourrait alors
apparaître sous des formes moins totalitaires et impulsives, moins masculines. C’est là aussi tout un travail de transformation des énoncés philosophiques, dont l’objet finit toujours par être quelque chose du Monde.
5

Laruelle and Schmid, “L’identité sexuée,” 19.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 25

tity and its capacity to create a unique moral, political, esthetical
universe—a “world”—is declared false. The only world we can
be in, and the only world we represent, is the world in the sense
of non-philosophy. The “world according to non-philosophy” is
analogous to Lacan’s symbolic order or Foucault’s disciplining discourses of power. It is indeed formative of the subject, but the human in the last instance, according to Laruelle, is pre-subjective. It
is the real of radical vulnerability and of the immanent revolting.
The inexhaustible force of revolt is not based in philosophy or the
world - it is situated in the radical opposition to it as it acts from
the standpoint of the lived. The opposition to the world or the
ruling norms/normativity is radically static. It is atemporal, and
does not participate in the transformations of meaning the world
produces. Nonetheless, it aspires to change the world in a way that
will make it less brutal to the radical vulnerability that the human-in-human is. Immanent rebellion is static, both as “not moving” and in the Athenian political concept of stasis that means a
rebellion or a civil war in the polis. Although stasis implies unrest,
it remains static vis-à-vis the world and stops the endless signification that the world compulsively produces. It represents a suspension of the polis. Stasis, meaning both as stillness and revolution
(στάσις), is a pause in the normality of the functioning state or
world. Immanent revolt consists in the human-in-human’s radical
externality with respect to the unstoppable auto-generated processes of subjection (of “being a subject”) in this world.
The world invades the mute lived (le vécu) of the human-in-human in the form of subjectivity. Meaning (sign), both general and
abstract, aims to shape the real and produce joy and suffering according to the ruling forms of jouissance, which are philosophically determined. The a priori invasiveness of the world makes
the human-in-human always already persecuted. The only way to
immanently revolt against the world is in a non-abstract way. Revolting against concrete occurrences of subjugation and violence,
rather than in the name of abstractions and visions of transformation of the world, is political action “affected by immanence.”6 It
is also action determined by “interests” that are real and sensuous
(or material), says Marx, rather than abstract or philosophical. As
explained in the previous chapter, abstraction itself is what ought
to be combated in order to create a world in consonance with the
real or the material immediate exigency. As Laruelle would say,
the world will be always made of philosophy and it will always already persecute the human-in-human. This constant revolution
can transform it into a socio-political order which is observant of
“real interests” rather than abstractions, writes Marx.
François Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2000), 48.

6

26 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

III. To be a Victim and to be a Messiah: Radical Humanity
The victim is defined by a radical passivity and not by an absolute one which Levinas attributes to the self. By definition, radical
passivity cannot re-act through an excess of power or by overpowering, it is impossible for it to act in a reflexive manner, but it
is capable of acting quite differently—by depotentializing philosophical overpowering.
- François Laruelle, Théorie générale des victimes

Revolt can grow both immanently and infinitely—because infinity
is dictated by intensity, and intensity is the mode of immanence—
only if it undercuts philosophical pretension. Its power is passive
since it is made of suffering. However, radical passivity is potent
because it silences and cancels any philosophical decision regarding the suffering of the always already persecuted. Radical passivity, and the revolt it engenders, is a cry to all the masters of the
world to cease their talk of victims and their liberation, to cease
re-presenting them and alienating them through representation.
Philosophical representation is never generic. It is an abstraction
whose origin is purely transcendental, whereas the generic is a
radical concept determined by the real and the “syntax of scientific description” that it dictates (see Laruelle’s Introduction au
non-marxisme). In Théorie Générale des Victimes (2012), Laruelle
explains the notion of the “generic” in the context of the study of
victims, and par consequence, both their revolt and the revolt of
those who act in radical solidarity with them. “The generic,” says
Laruelle, “is a process of reduction of any philosophical or macroscopic entity, of its nature of a double, doubling, double transcendence (the consciences, the ego or a psycho-sociological identity).
Reduction to a phenomenal immanence, one, however, lived as
objective, subjected to the quantum principle of superposition is
not a principle of a logical identity.”7 So, in the last instance, the
identity of the victim should be defined as follows:
In effect, the identity of the victim, if the latter is defined
physically and generically, is of specific nature which builds
on the proto-quantum procedure of superposition or interference, and in no way on psychological or social identification.8
François Laruelle, Théorie générale des victimes (Paris: Fayard, 2012), 30.
Laruelle, Théorie générale des victimes, 30: “L’identité de la victime en effet, si elle doit être définie physiquement et génériquement, est d’une nature spéciale qui appelle des procédure proto-quantique de superposition
ou d’interférence, nullement d’identification psychologique ou sociale.”

7

8

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 27

If we rid the concept of the victim of all its philosophical “essences,” or all forms of representation which transform the lived
suffering of the victims into pure transcendence (meanings of
victimhood), we do away with the representation and the images
(produced through media) of the victims which act in the stead of
the victim’s reality. The philosophically mediated idea of a victim,
which is produced by the media and the intellectuals who represent and defend them, pretends to be the reality of the victims’
suffering that is interpellated to identify with these images and the
meanings that are assigned to them. Considering that the notions
of the world and philosophy are synonymous in non-standard
philosophy, the media is one of the most powerful and active machines of the production of philosophical images (or of the ruling
representations in and of the world that dictates our actions). The
more they seek to be realistic the more detached from the real
they are. They establish, in Laruellian terms, an amphibology of
the real and the philosophical (or the transcendental), whereby
the latter acts instead of the former. The absurd is produced by the
pretension that the “meaningful real” is more real than “just the
real,” with the latter being deemed as the unruly effect of “meaningless” thrust on an almost physical symptom—tuché as Lacan
would call it—into the universe of meaning.
In Théorie générale des victimes, Laruelle invites us to establish
a process of compassion (in its etymological sense) or co-suffering with the victim with a complete disregard for the mediation of
victimhood by intellectuals (and their world of the media). How
do we accomplish this goal?
If we reduce the humanist human to a human without humanism, or the instance of the real made of the lived of suffering (and
joy), then what we are faced with in a victim in the last instance is
the lived of suffering. To establish solidarity is to co-suffer by virtue of the rudimentary cognitive procedure of identification with
the pain to which the other is subjected. Let us paraphrase Spinoza: one imagines the pain suffered by the other in a unilateral way;
the pain invades the “imagination” of the co-sufferer that produces a “life-decreasing” effect.9 One imagines the fundamental vulnerability of the other and of oneself, which is a procedure of Spinozian identification. The process of abstraction (cognitive and
metaphysical/existential) only can enable alienation from the other persons’s suffering, and thus fails to identify with its experience,
viz. “imagine” with “life decreasing” effects. On the other hand,
the tendency to establish compassion with what it means to be a
victim, or what it means to suffer “the loss of dignity” and “value
of the human life,” is essentially philosophical. It always already
9
Benedict de Spinoza, The Ethics, trans. by R. H. M. Elwes (The Project
Gutenberg Etext Publication: 2003), III 30p.

28 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

alienates the real, which is the human in the last instance. Co-suffering with the other’s real in terms of the real implies an abandonment of (philosophical) humanism. It produces a radically human
sociality, or in Marx’s terms, one in accordance with the interests
of the “species being of humanity” rather than abstract ideas of
general humanity.10 Solidarity stems not solely from lived co-suffering, but also from the concomitant experience of immanent
revolt or “immanent struggle” (Laruelle). Therefore, it is the lived
of immanent revolt for the other’s suffering as one’s own which is
the basis of solidarity—or rather, radical solidarity—in and for the
“species” or “non-human” (the human without humanism).
Suffering immanently produces revolt, whereas co-suffering
gives rise to an immanent revolt-in-species or radical solidarity
(of the “non-human”). I would argue that revolt-in-species is determined by Marx’s concept of the human species as a hybrid of
socio-political relations (forming a whole), nature, and physiology. This is an idea of the human as a social and biological factum,
without the abstractions of humanism. Therefore, the solidarity
we establish with another human being, understood through a
Marxian reading of Laruelle, is determined by biology as much as
it is determined by the whole of heterogeneous and complex social
relations. It is not driven by the idea of an essence of humanity that
is incarnated by each human being.
Feuerbach resolves the essence of religion into the essence
of man [menschliche Wesen = ‘human nature’]. But the essence of man is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. In reality, it is the ensemble of the social relations.11
The human species is defined as an animal species, and is therefore determined in the last instance by nature:
That man’s physical and spiritual life is linked to nature
means simply that nature is linked to itself, for man is a
part of nature.12
10
Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 (Moscow:
Progress Publishers, 1959), available at https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/preface.htm; Karl Marx, “Theses
on Feuerbach,” in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The German Ideology, trans. Roy Pascal (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1938), available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/theses/.
11
Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach,” in Marx and Engels, The German Ideology.
12
Karl Marx, “First Manuscript: Estranged Labor,” in Marx, Economic and
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, available at http://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/labour.htm.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 29

Solidarity is radically grounded in physicality. Namely, alienation—through objectification of labor—deprives the human
being of their labor and of means of subsistence provided by nature, therefore subjugating them by virtue of rendering them first
a worker and then as a physical subject. Political solidarity and
collective revolt are, in the last instance, about overcoming the
alienation of the human animal from nature as the source in the
last instance of its means of subsistence, and as the real universe of
their labor. It is also about overcoming alienation from and within
the human universe of social and political relations. This process
is also a return to the real, the material (without materialism), and
the “sensuous” (Marx) human life and its relations to other beings,
nature, and the products of labor as part of or non-alienated from
nature:
Man is directly a natural being. As a natural being and
as a living natural being he is on the one; hand endowed
with natural powers, vital powers—he is an active natural
being. These forces exist in him as tendencies and abilities—as instincts. On the other hand, as a natural, corporeal, sensuous objective being he is a suffering, conditioned
and limited creature, like animals and plants. That is to
say, the objects of his instincts exist outside him, as objects independent of him; yet these objects are objects that
he needs—essential objects, indispensable to the manifestation and confirmation of his essential powers. To say that
man is a corporeal, living, real, sensuous, objective being
full of natural vigour is to say that he has real, sensuous objects as the object of his being or of his life, or that he can
only express his life in real, sensuous objects. To be objective, natural and sensuous, and at the same time to have object, nature and sense outside oneself, or oneself to be object, nature and sense for a third party, is one and the same
thing.13
Alienation can be overcome only in the last instance, which
is physicality, matter, or the real of suffering and of “instincts.”
Emancipation from any form of oppression is emancipation from
alienation which stems from abstraction. Abstraction is a philosophical procedure of creating an auto-referential “universe of
meaning,” which is detached from the real of human existence in
order to objectify it, master it, and exploit it. Subjects of abstracKarl Marx, “Third Manuscript: Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy in General,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/hegel.
htm.
13

30 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

tion and alienation are not only the proletariat and the precariat,
but also the exploiters in the capitalist era. Emancipation is possible only if we all are equally called to “give up our abstractions”
(Marx). All of us are, in the last instance, radically vulnerable
pre-subjective identities that revolt against exploitation and violence. This messianic revolt and resistance should be directed
against the subject positions which maintain alienation and use
the abstraction to exploit, subjugate, and alienate its species.
The brutality of exploiting what Laruelle terms “the human-in-human” (the pre-subjective instance of the real, or the
instance of the lived that the human in the last instance is), the
infliction of pain on others, or profit from exploitative violence, is
enabled only if the human being is objectified as labor and nature
is objectified as a means of production and subsistence. Nature
certainly provides subsistence, but alienation from and within it
occurs when it is objectified. Alienation’s immediate result is violence, subjugation, and exploitation (of all and everyone subject
to alienation).
Thus, if the product of his labor, his labor objectified, is for
him an alien, hostile, powerful object independent of him,
then his position towards it is such that someone else is
master of this object, someone who is alien, hostile, powerful, and independent of him. If he treats his own activity as
an unfree activity, then he treats it as an activity performed
in the service, under the dominion, the coercion, and the
yoke of another man.14
Estrangement of labor, estrangement from within the species
and other species, and also estrangement from oneself—appearing as objectifying oneself as labor force or as “abstract activity
and a belly”—can be overcome by the radical procedure of immanently correlating with the site of the real of suffering and joy,
which in the last instance is not an abstraction (i.e., the bodily
or the “sensuousness” of the self).15 Recuperating the determination-in-the-last-instance of the human as the physical, material, bodily, or rooted in and ultimately determined by “nature,”
aims at the realization of the human animal as a non-human or
non-animal. In other words, the human species can transcend
alienation—hence, oppression—only by radically grounding itself
in its material or real humanity, one that precedes philosophy, and
Marx, “First Manuscript: Estranged Labor,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844.
15
Karl Marx, “First Manuscript: Wages of Labour,” in Marx, Economic and
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, available at http://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/wages.htm.
14

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 31

ultimately, language. The human can come to its fullest realization by succumbing to the immanence of human animality (the
human without humanism), through following the syntax of the
real that it dictates in the processes of cognition and metaphysics
it prompts.
IV. Metaphysics in Radical Terms and as Real Necessity
François Laruelle’s book, entitled Théorie des Etrangers: Science
des hommes, démocratie et non-psychanalyse (1995), is a project
of non-philosophical procedure which radicalizes Lacanian psychoanalysis to what Laruelle terms as “non-analysis.” 16 Namely, it
aims to radicalize psychoanalysis by producing conceptual means
for it to account for the workings of the instance of the real and
its conditioning effects on signifying processes. The real of the
human-in-human, according to Laruelle’s non-analysis, inevitably mediates itself through the process of estranging oneself from
the real that one is. One has to transpose oneself into a lingually
conceived self, into a subject, in order to mediate the real (one
is) to the others and to oneself. Prior to becoming a subject one
becomes a “Stranger,” which is “radical subjectivity.”17 Unlike the
subject which can emerge only as the result of a fully completed
estrangement from the lived (the real), and which is a signifying
position or virtually a sheer function (of the self), the Stranger is
affected by the immanence of the process of estrangement. It is
concrete, made of transcendental material (language), and is in
unilateral affirmation of the dyad that is consisted of the real and
the transcendental (language). In its gesture of estrangement, the
Stranger transcends the real while experiencing the process of estrangment from the real that he or she has (in the last instance)
insofar lived. The real from which one alienates oneself is objectified so that one can transcend the real that one is. Thus, one transcends oneself, the self in the last instance, or the self-in-the-real,
so one is rendered an object of control and auto-production by the
language and through the function of the linguistically competent
subject.
The Stranger is still in the real (of estrangement) while the
trauma of the primal metaphysical procedure takes place—that of
“becoming stranger to oneself ” or sensing the core of oneself as
an exteriority. Laruelle insists the “concreteness” of the Stranger
is not “empirico-metaphysical,” but rather “transcendental.” My
claim is that this gesture is fundamentally metaphysical. Scientific
thought is transcendental with respect to the unruly real. It creates
François Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers: Science des hommes, démocratie
et non-psychanalyse (Paris: Éditions Kimé, 1995).
17
Laruelle, Théorie des Étrangers, 196.

16

32 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

designs and produces abstractions which aim to explain the real.
The experience of estrangement, however, is existentially conditioning—or, in philosophical vocabulary, “ontological”—as it
introduces the “spectrality” of language or thought as an inalienable element of the self. The paradox, which, non-philosophically
speaking is falsehood and does not exist, engenders the creation
of religion, philosophy, science, or the “human species” as the
most metaphysical animal (Other animals experience metaphysical states as well, as I have been convinced by Giorgio Agamben’s
treatise “The Open.”). Wondering, or θαῦμα, over the necessity
of the production of the spectral self and the world of spectrality,
wondering if the real self is (in) the real itself, or if the truth of it
(what we make out of it as linguistic subjects) is more real (than
the real devoid of meaning/truth), prompts metaphysics. When
metaphysics conditions the physical to the extent that it perverts
its “life-increasing” (Spinoza) impulses, or the conatus of survival urging “life-decreasing” activities (such as alienated labor and
fruits of that labor), that means that “a sufficient thought,” viz.
thought that usurps the status of the real conditions the world. It
conditions the world politico-economically as well as philosophically, causing radical subjection and exploitation of the “real” and
the “sensuous” (Marx). By objectifying the “material” (without
philosophical materialism), absolute abstraction has effaced any
trace of the experience of estrangement as immanent, and has
committed the perfect crime against the real (Baudrillard) by convincing the world that it (abstraction) has always been the only
real that ever existed. According to this logic, the “senseless real”
is not real. What makes sense and what is real have been equated.
In non-philosophy, the equation at issue is called “decisionism,” which is what defines philosophy. This is, according to Laruelle, the defining trait of any and all philosophy, and is one of the
facets of the principle of sufficient philosophy, as discussed in the
previous chapter. 18 Namely, it decides a priori what the real is,
and according to this grounding definition only, carries out all
further investigations of the real and different realities. Scientific approach, both according to Laruelle and Marx, permits that
thought is always “surprised” by the real, and that gaps and inconsistencies in a system of thought are allowed, and moreover,
are invited and unavoidable since thought succumbs to the “real”
rather than to the “real’s meaning.” Therefore, the transcendental—which is the substance of any form of thought—is also the
material that scientific thought is made of. The necessary procedure of estrangement is, however, metaphysical.
The metaphysical is the effect of the necessary procedure of
François Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie (Liège and Brussels:
Mardaga, 1989), 45ff.
18

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 33

estrangement, of the unavoidability to create the spectral doublet of the physical self, and to transcend physicality in the form
of re-creating oneself as an idea of oneself. To paraphrase Lacan,
the mirror image of the self tends to occupy the position of the
real self. It is endowed with the ambition to become “more real
than the real.” In this sense, it is identical with the tendencies of
philosophy. Nonetheless, the primary metaphysical experience
takes place in the mist of vagueness of the concept and physicality
of the real. The subject constituting process of estrangement is a
sensation, as it involves physicality and intense mental experience
which precedes pure concept, but nonetheless represents a process
of conceptualization. This process is what Laruelle would call an
instance of the lived (vécu), rather than an exclusively intellectual
procedure which follows the laws of logic and discipline of maintaining a consistent “universe of meaning.” Although it seeks to
establish control over the real, it also seeks to “fill” the spectral self
with it in order for the real to legitimize the idea of the self. It seeks
not to find itself, but to remain in the fissure of the split between
the idea-(of)-self and the real, by ensuring the real will “legitimize” the idea by finding itself at home with or in it.
Philosophy enters the scene when meaning seeks to legitimize
the real upon the basis of radical detachment and indifference to
it; even the reverse direction of inter-legitimization, in the last
instance, consists in the same gesture: by claiming that the real
is reflected by thought in its totality, one produces a reality that
should act in the stead of the real (as a more perfect real than the
real itself). Concurring with Laruelle, let us say that the equation
established between thought and the real is the essential procedure of philosophy (i.e., its decisionism). It presupposes overcoming the anxiety that is produced by the real seemingly splitting
into two when the idea of the self emerges as a reality in its own
right. As for the metaphysical—in the sense that I am using the
word here—its struggle with the real and the possibility of detachment of the spectral self from the real is an experience of anxiety,
pain, and pleasure. In the last instance it is an experience, a pure
instance of the lived (Laruelle) or the real, albeit involving transcendental operations (i.e., the mental processes of duplication of
the real).
The processes of alienation that are foundational for the subject create a metaphysical drama that determines grand ideologies, universes of meaning (philosophies, political and economic
contracts), and the human species’ “being-before-death” and sexuality. Alienation is the operation that is conditional for the possibility of exploitation; it enables the severing from the “state of
innocence” in which the naive and radical human is in awe of the
real (of) life, so that the possibility of objectifying the real of other
living beings or oneself is inconceivable. This procedure of objec-

34 | THE POSSIBILITY OF IMMANENT REVOLT

tification is indispensible; it is enabled by the operation of alienation from oneself, others, the “sensuous life” (Marx), and the real.
Only by virtue of absolute alienation, which brings about absolute
abstraction, and only by abstraction’s usurpation of the position of
the real (as “the most perfect real”), has the criminal rule of capitalism been inaugurated and maintained. Such a process is impossible without the immanently philosophical operation of “gradation of the real,” according to which the truer a reality is, “the more
real” it is. What is specific of capitalism and modernity is the fact,
unlike in the premodern times when the “most real reality” was
somewhere else, in a different universe (“the world of ideas”, the
Kingdom of God) the “ever perfecting real” occupies the material
space and temporality of the human. Thus, it is a sheer operation;
it is a methodological procedure and a ruse. It does not believe in
the possibility of a better and more perfect universe, but only in
the intellectual trick which constitutes a reality in its own right.
It simulates the material reality and also operates with it, but it is
concerned with it only in order to spectralize and accomplish its
total exploitation. The materialism of contemporary capitalist society is deprived of a sense of realness, since the real is replaced by
operations of abstraction which is made of the meanings that we
have assigned to the real and materiality. Both capitalist and modern philosophy’s materialism is about the unstoppable tendency—
since it is an immanent tendency—to transpose “sensuous matter”
into the meanings that can be attached and thereof be reduced
from it. Perversely, its materialism is without matter. The ruse
of abstraction has mathematized matter and body, transforming
economy into finances and sensations into psychological phenomena subject to biopolitical control. To speculate with resources, with lives, has brought about the rule of absolute speculation:
management of realities and financial speculation as economy.
The political task of greatest urgency today is to emancipate
the radically metaphysical and the “sensuous life” (the material
without materialism, and the real without philosophical realism)
from the rule of abstraction. This is the core of Marx’s call for
emancipation of the “human species.” This call has never been answered through any other means except philosophy. “Dialectical
materialism” is philosophically sufficient, put in Laruellian terms.
Namely, it is a sufficient principle to determine and decide what is
real. Not to betray this principle—not to betray the principles of
its doctrine—has become more important than not to betray the
real which invites the doctrine to examine its tenets. Abstraction
has ruled Marxism, and Marxism has ruled through abstraction,
for more than a century. Communist parties and states of the 20th
century, in spite of their numerous differences, have had one thing
in common—the real, material, and sensuous human life was the
objectifiable material and means that served their greater political

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 35

goal. Marx explains, saying, “The perfect political state is, by its
nature, man’s species-life, as opposed to his material life.”19
If “giving up one’s abstractions” (Marx) is the central and most
important task of the science that Marx invents and attempts to
institute, then the task is to emancipate the necessary and primitive metaphysics mediating the immediate real. Economic emancipation and other important forms of social emancipation would
only follow consequentially. The first task is to overcome the underlying alienation enabling the dichotomy between state politics
and the civil society, between the “spiritual” or religion and the
secular, and finally, to overcome phantomal existence and its suffocation of “real life”:
The perfect political state is, by its nature, man’s species-life,
as opposed to his material life. All the preconditions of this
egoistic life continue to exist in civil society outside the
sphere of the state, but as qualities of civil society. Where
the political state has attained its true development, man—
not only in thought, in consciousness, but in reality, in
life—leads a twofold life, a heavenly and an earthly life: life
in the political community, in which he considers himself a
communal being, and life in civil society, in which he acts
as a private individual, regards other men as a means, degrades himself into a means, and becomes the plaything of
alien powers. The relation of the political state to civil society is just as spiritual as the relations of heaven to earth. The
political state stands in the same opposition to civil society,
and it prevails over the latter in the same way as religion
prevails over the narrowness of the secular world—i.e., by
likewise having always to acknowledge it, to restore it, and
allow itself to be dominated by it. In his most immediate
reality, in civil society, man is a secular being. Here, where
he regards himself as a real individual, and is so regarded
by others, he is a fictitious phenomenon. In the state, on
the other hand, where man is regarded as a species-being,
he is the imaginary member of an illusory sovereignty, is
deprived of his real individual life and endowed with an
unreal universality.20
Instead of simply concluding with this quote by Marx, let us remind ourselves that so far, both the bourgeois and communist regimes have managed to maintain and deepen these divisions. They
Karl Marx, “On the Jewish Question,” Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, February 1844, available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1844/jewish-question/.
19

20

Marx, “On the Jewish Question.”

3: Metaphysics of the Finance Economy
Radicalization as the Method of Revoking Real
Economy

If “giving up our abstractions” is the central and most important
task of the science that Marx invents and attempts to institute,
then I would argue that the following task should be to emancipate
the metaphysics, or the object of that science, from the authority
of philosophy. It is the primitive and radical metaphysics of the
inevitable gesture of mediating the immediate real that ought to
be salvaged through non-philosophical scientific operations with
the chôra of metaphysical thought. Economic emancipation and
other important forms of social emancipation would only follow
consequentially. I would sum up Marx’s project as follows: the
central task is to overcome the underlying philosophical alienation
that enables the dichotomies of state politics and civil society of
the “spiritual” (or religious) and the secular (of “use value” and
“surplus value”). Finally, the task of Marxist science is to serve a
political struggle that seeks to overcome the phantomal existence
that is shaped by wage labor and surplus value. The universe, ruled
by surplus value, is guided by the impulse to suffocate real life and
its material grounding, which is represented as use value.
To radicalize metaphysics is to render it transcendental in the
last instance, to acknowledge it as the necessary mediator or core
of radical subjectivity, which Laruelle terms “the Stranger.” The
subject establishes a relation of exteriority to it, and seen in its last
instance (or radically and inalienably),1 it is the Stranger at the
1

François Laruelle, Théorie des Etrangers: Science des hommes, démocratie

38 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

heart of the human-in-human. This concept admits and affirms
the dyad between the real and the lived, or “le joui sans jouissance”
of the human in the last instance and the subject, while remaining
radically descriptive or minimally transcendental.2 This affirmation
of the dyad engenders the radical subjectivity or the “figure of the
Stranger.” The sense of pain of the original estrangement, the sense
of appropriation of this pain that transmutes the painful lived into
joy, and the sense of possession, being at home, or of inalienable
belonging with the Stranger emerging from the heart of our mute
self, is the most immediate form of radical metaphysics.
My claim is that there is no exit from metaphysics. We are
metaphysical creatures inasmuch as we are material ones, with the
latter always already inviting the former. However, an exit from the
disciplining and hallucinatory grasp of philosophical metaphysics
is possible, as both Marx and Laruelle have shown. The effect
of such exit is not only intellectual or academic, but also social.
Philosophical decisionism, in absolute form, is the essence of
politics and the capitalist economy, which I will try to demonstrate
further in this chapter. Nonetheless, the ideas of political systems
and the possibilities of thinkable political horizons remains or
becomes ever more detached from the economic logic of the
liberal, pseudo-materialistic, and individualist philosophy of
exploitation through capitalist alienation.
Philosophical entrapment of metaphysics is constituted by
the so-called amphibology of “the being” and the real, and of
the “essence” and “the being.”3 I would like to propose a nonphilosophical procedure of radicalizing metaphysics through
unilateralizing the dyad, by situating it in the “material self ” as
its subject. Through the necessary and radical estrangement, or in
Laruelle’s terms, through the emergence of the figure of the Stranger
at the core of the real or the human-in-human, the inception of
the metaphysical is constitutive of every subjectivization. This
inception is painful, but nonetheless inevitable and always already
in place without being the product of a philosophical intention.
Radicalizing metaphysics would result in furnishing the grounds
for a realist, or non-philosophically materialist, theory of the
human universe. The radical dyad is at the heart of the material
self that has trouble claiming its own self as its own. Affirming
this dyad means affirming the real of the trauma that it produces.
It also means affirming its reality instead of erasing it through a
second gesture, which is always philosophical (which includes
religion, and in particular, Abrahamic theologies).
et non-psychanalyse (Paris: Éditions Kimé, 1995), 196 : “‘Radical’ ne signifie pas autre chose qu’inaliénable ou que de-dernière-instance.”
2
Larulle, Théorie des Etrangers, 221–223.
3
A Laruellian term, explained in the previous chapters.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 39

I. The Source of the Capitalist Drive: Dispossession
Rather than Possession
The sense of alienation begins at the level of subject’s constitution;
it is this sense of dispossession that begets the grounding anxiety
that creates philosophy as a panic and totalitarian response.
Capitalist hyper-production of “added value” (added to the surplus
value) represents a total colonization of society and material life
by philosophy as the totalitarian response to a metaphysical need.
This metaphysical need is materially grounded. The hysteria of
private possession and of possessing the truth (of the real) as if it
were the real itself aims to compensate for this primordial sense
of dispossession. Can the problem of primordial dispossession be
solved through the gesture of erasing it, and if done so, wouldn’t
that be a properly philosophical response? So, is the abolition of
the desire for any form of possession or property the true goal of
communism, seen as the result of the non-philosophical science
that Marx attempts to establish? If alienation created through
wage labor represents exacerbation of the sense of grounding
dispossession, then capitalism is certainly not the solution to it, in
spite of its ceaseless compulsion to be precisely that (for the chosen
few and on the expense of the rest of the objectified humanity).
Therefore, a sense of possession is not what defines capital and the
capitalist self; it is rather the insatiable urge for it that originates
in the grounding dispossession. The capitalist drive creates an
unstoppable process of alienation of labor, objectifying human
labor and the suffering behind it. Numeric or speculative values of
pleasure or sources of pleasure (measured in money) derives from
the urge toward ever-greater perfection through an abstraction of
the needs that are only in their last instance material. In short, the
founding operation of capitalist society is the dispossession of the
material from its own metaphysical transposition (for example, of
the worker from her metaphysics of work, or of the lover from
his metaphysics of pleasure). The cancelling of radical or primitive
metaphysics is the defining prerequisite of philosophical and
capitalist metaphysics.
At the beginning of the 21st century, the economy is no longer
an economy in the proper sense of the word. Instead, it is an
instrument of finances that postures as an economy in its own
right. The “Finance industry” establishes amphibology with the
real economy, which is linked to material production of material
consumables (a term explained below). The purely symbolic and
linguistic (insofar as a matter of signification) value of money is
no longer added to the material or use value. It is utterly detached
from it. It has become auto-referential, and its value is measured
only according to hypothetical measurements in hypothetical

40 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

systems of measuring. According to The Financial Crisis Inquiry
Report published by the US Government in 2011,4 the great
financial crisis that began in 2008 (and in 2014, it seems, it is here
to stay), or the “recession,” was the result of “wrong estimations
of the ranking agencies and the banks” about the worth of
“derivatives,” “securities,” and other forms of derivation of
financial value from other financial values with no direct reference
to any real or physical property or use value (indirectly and in the
last instance, after a virtually endless line of mediations, there
is always reference to an estimation of the worth of a material
property). The authors of the report write:
In the years leading up to the crisis, too many financial
institutions, as well as too many households, borrowed to
the hilt, leaving them vulnerable to financial distress or ruin
if the value of their investments declined even modestly. For
example, as of 2007, the five major investment banks—Bear
Stearns, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch,
and Morgan Stanley—were operating with extraordinarily
thin capital. By one measure, their leverage ratios were as
high as 40 to 1, meaning for every $40 in assets, there was
only 1$ in capital to cover losses. Less than a 3$ drop in
asset values could wipe out a firm. To make matters worse,
much of their borrowing was short-term, in the overnight
market—meaning the borrowing had to be renewed each
and every day. For example, at the end of 2007, Bear Stearns
had $11.8 billion in equity and $383.6 billion in liabilities
and was borrowing as much as $70 billion in the overnight
market. It was the equivalent of a small business with
$50.000 in equity borrowing $1.6 million, with $296,750
of that due each and every day. One can’t really ask, “What
were they thinking?” when it seems that too many of them
were thinking alike. And the leverage was often hidden—
in derivatives positions, in off-balance-sheet entities, and
through “window dressing” of financial reports available to
the investing public.5
Evidently, what was traded was not the material value (or
the use value) of a material or physical object together with its
estimated surplus value. The surplus value only entered into
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission [FCIC], The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the
Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States (Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Publishing Office, 2011), xix–xx; available at http://www.
gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/GPO-FCIC/content-detail.html.
5
FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, xx.

4

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 41

exchange after it had become completely detached from any
reference to or relevance with use value. Negligence and squander
of the real value of mortgages, or the fact that their real financial
value had been unchecked or falsified, was not the main reason for
“the collapse of the financial system” in 2008. The possibility of an
utterly speculative trade, one that is based on pure abstractions of
values and the complete detachment from the material (reflected
in use value), is the generator of the problem. Moreover, this
represents the very foundation of investment banking and the
“investment business” as a form of economy. As we can see in the
report quoted above, the “investment economy” is not based on
capital in the classical sense of the word. It is not even based on
capital in the financial sense, which implies its translatability into
the material. Its foundations lie in the “thin air” of its capacities to
rank, estimate, evaluate, predict, create, and control processes in
the financial market.
There is nothing material in the 21st century’s form of
capitalism. Contemporary capitalism is not only based on
“immaterial labor,” as Negri and Hardt claim,6 but also on pure
abstraction and elevation to the immateriality of both labor and
capital. This situation is the result of the complete mathematization
and speculation of the real. The 662 pages of The Financial Crisis
Inquiry Report by the US Government (quoted above) displays
the blatant truth that the concept (and all of its possible realities)
of “investment banking” itself is indiscernible from the so called
“shadow banking system.” In the last instance it is speculative,
and while speculating it interprets the material according to its
own immanent rules (of speculation) and is in no way bound by
the “primitive real.” The real that has not been transformed into
a meaning, signification, or value is the “primitive,” unruly real
that seems to be non-existent unless given shape and value by
the speculative mind. Investment banking, in the last instance,
is determined by the practice of conducting “expertise” and
speculation about the immaterial value (surplus or financial
value) behind—or derived from—material worth:
First, we describe the phenomenal growth of the shadow
banking system—the investment banks, most prominently,
but also other financial institutions—that freely operated
in capital markets beyond the reach of the regulatory
apparatus that had been put in place in the wake of the
crash of 1929 and the Great Depression. This new system
threatened the once-dominant traditional commercial
banks, and they took their grievances to their regulators
Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Multitudes: War and Democracy in
the Age of Empire (New York: Penguin, 2004).

6

42 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

and to Congress, which slowly but steadily removed longstanding restrictions and helped banks break out of their
traditional mold and join the feverish growth. As a result,
two parallel financial system of enormous scale emerged.7
Capitalism is grounded in fetishization, wrote Marx. The
contemporary economy is, in the last instance, determined by
fetishism. Marx’s fetishization may have been borrowed from the
studies of religion that he was familiar with when he was writing
the first volume of Capital, but its meaning is very precise in terms
of understanding the split between and surplus value, and also
how the latter engenders the very logic of money as capital:
M-M’. We have here the original starting-point of capital,
money in the formula M-C -M’ reduced to its two extremes
M—M’, in which M’=M+DM, money creating more money.
It is the primary and general formula of capital reduced to a
meaningless condensation. It is ready capital, a unity of the
process of production and the process of circulation, and
hence capital yielding a definite surplus-value in a particular
period of time. In the form of interest-bearing capital this
appears directly, unassisted by the processes of production
and circulation. Capital appears as a mysterious and selfcreating source of interest—the source of its own increase.
The thing (money, commodity, value) is now capital even as
a mere thing, and capital appears as a mere thing. [...] The
social relation is consummated in the relation of a thing,
of money, to itself. Instead of the actual transformation of
money into capital, we see here only form without content.
As in the case of labour-power, the use-value of money
here is its capacity of creating value—a value greater than
it contains. Money as money is potentially self-expanding
value and is loaned out as such—which is the form of sale
for this singular commodity.8
If capitalism is determined in the last instance by what Marx
calls “fetishism,” and if the latter is determined as speculative
(hence, philosophical),9 it is bound to end up (and also end) as
FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, 27–28.
Karl Marx, “Externalization of the Relations of Capital in the Form of
Interest-Bearing Capital,” in Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political
Economy, Vol. 3 (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1959), available at https://
www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/.
9
As explained in the previous chapters, Marx equates philosophy with the
abstract or the metaphysical (even when it is defined as «materialistic»),
and it is difficult to determine if he sees any intrinsic possibility for it to
7

8

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 43

a “financial economy” instead of a “real economy.” By instituting
the “fiat money” principle at its very origins, the possibility of
an economy unattached to any material or use value (or in some
economic vocabularies “objective value”) has been introduced.
Moreover, speculation, and therefore detachment from the real, is
the determination in the last instance and the vector of a capitalist
economy.
II. Pure Speculation as the Determination in the Last
Instance of Capitalism as Philosophy
The detachment from use value produces and sustains the
defining relevance of the pretension that the speculative logic of
the economy determines or engineers the use value itself. The
implication is, therefore, that direct and material needs can be
subsumed under fetish based needs. This desire is disciplined
by the capitalist jouissance; it operates upon the physical that
attempts to mould it. As language governs the body and as
philosophy governs the real, these “speculative needs” are more
urgent than material ones. A philosophy as the world or the world as
philosophy, specifically defined by capitalism, is what sustains these
processes and maintains capital’s circulation of significance.
The philosophical/capitalist mirror of desires and needs falls
asunder when confronted by the material urgency of suffering
bodies. The pain, hunger, and rage created by the urgency of survival
dispels the speculum of detached needs, which are inscribed in
the universe of “what matters in human life.” When economic
resources that provide for material (and “spiritual” as used in
Marx’s texts) needs and interests are exhausted and survival is
under threat, the speculum of capitalism and philosophy becomes
“the bubble” that The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report talks about.
In 2008, the bubble burst and thereupon the state intervened.
This intervention could not, however, be speculative. It had to
draw on the material resources of its citizens: mortgages defaulted
in the US and austerity cuts introduced in the EU. This brute
material had to enter the scene of finances. The material, in the
guise of defaulted mortgages and destroyed livelihoods, provided
the grounds for the resurrection of a universe of nothing but
signification—of finances and the speculative “finance industry.”
The world made of the “estimation” of material had to be saved
by a holocaust of the material. In the end, it wasn’t the monetary
value added to the material use value and labor force, but the sheer
bricks of land, life (as labor force), and livelihood of the labor force
that had to ensure the survival of the banks and the resurrection of
detach itself from the metaphysical determination in the last instance.

44 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

the specter (namely, the market of speculation). These bricks and
livelihoods were destroyed as soon as they were translated into
“derivatives.”
The 2008 crisis was the first instance in the history of
capitalism when the speculative foundation was proven untenable
unless supported by matter and, in the last instance, determined
by the real and/or the physical. Contemporary economics is the
product of philosophical determination in the last instance, which
postulates that the brute material is meaningless unless signified
as monetary value. All ought to become pure signification since
the material in itself is meaningless and worthless in the human
universe which is made of signs, exchanges of signification, and
communication. My generalization is that, according to the
ruling visions of authority today, the essence of economy, or
the logic of the market, has its own intrinsic laws unattached to
the basic survival needs of human and non-human animals. In
the last instance, contemporary economics is determined by
the transcendental. Namely, it is determined by a philosophical
decision on what reality is, this decision institutes itself as more
real than the real itself. The transcendental postulation that
constitutes this determination in the last instance is Kantian and
post-Kantian. In other words, it is always already postmodern.
The capitalist vision of the world is essentially philosophical.
It is a vision determined by its decisionism, rather than by the
authority of the real without the “added value” of philosophical or
economical meaning. With this explanation of capitalism in view,
I concur with the accelerationist manifesto of Nick Srnicek and
Alex Wiliams, inspired by Nick Land’s theory of accelerationism,
according to which speeding up capitalism’s functioning according
to its inherent logic could be revolutionary.10 Nonetheless, acceleration itself is immanent to a capitalist political economy. The
sheer introduction of the gesture of acceleration to what already
accelerates itself unstoppably does not constitute an intervention
(let alone a revolution). Emancipation of the processes of
acceleration from the bourgeois grip and its subsequent radical
socialization (transformation into commons rather than the
private property of a few individuals) is required in order to
transcend capitalism and begin the creation of a socialist society.
This increasingly accelerated capitalism will inevitably take
its political-economic infrastructure and specter of “finance
industry” to the stage of hitting against the bedrock of the real,
and as a result, to the falling asunder of its auto-referential
Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams, “#Accelerate: Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics, Critical Legal Thinking” (weblog), May 14, 2013, http://
criticallegalthinking.com/2013/05/14/accelerate-manifesto-for-an-accelerationist-politics.
10

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 45

meaninglessness. The real is not speculative; it is “the physical and
sensuous” (Marx). It is the real-of-the-human that is presubjective
and prelingual.11 Therefore, the revolts in city squares, the sitins, the occupation of space, and as Benjamin Noys argues, the
overall slowing down and resistance to the temporal strategies of
capital is one of the effective forms of resistance.12 In a parallel
fashion, another form of resistance is to accelerate the speed of
speculative finance in order for it to hit against the impossibility
of the real that consists of the lack of material resources. If the
finance industry capitalizes on the ruse of projections about the
worth of the material (all assets backed by material property), the
absence of anything to estimate and project about will end.13 The
surplus value and use value will inevitably dissociate when there
are disproportionately more empty buildings than populated
ones, by way of an inflation of defaulted mortgages and devaluated
assets. Evidently, an apocalyptic landscape is necessary for a new
political horizon to appear. Nick Land’s accelerationist nihilism
also could be understood in this sense—this is where I identify
its revolutionary potential (regardless of whether Land positions
himself right or left).14
The financial crisis in 2008 proved wrong the philosophical
grounding of the modern economy as essentially materialistic and
conveyed its purely transcendental and speculative foundations.
The sobering effect of the real materialized in the form of trauma
caused by defaulted mortgages, lost homes, and lost jobs dispelled
the mathematical purity of contemporary economy as financial
in its last instance. In spite of the blow of the real that burst
the global financial bubble in 2008, six years later, the fetish or
specter of money rules stronger than ever. Austerity cuts aim at
saving speculation itself. Remorseless saving has been imposed
not only on social strata, but also on entire countries. The most
prominent case in Europe is that of Greece. Greece’s real economy
is practically dead because of fictitious debt—being “interest
rates” and speculation on the worth of estimation (money). The
real economy is dying in the name of the industry that produces
signification and value. The finance industry is now alive and
well, in perfect detachment from the material or use worth,
whereas its material resources are progressively impoverished and
François Laruelle, Ethique de l’Étranger (Paris: Éditions Kimé, 2000),
259.
12
Benjamin Noys, “The War of Time: Occupation, Resistance, Communization, Identities: Journal for Politics, Gender and Culture 10.1-2 (2013): 83–92.
13
Brett Scott, The Heretic Guide to Global Finance: Hacking the Future of
Money (London: Pluto Press, 2013).
14
Nick Land, Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987-2007, eds. Ray
Brassier and Robin McKay (Falmouth, UK: Urbanomic, 2011).
11

46 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

marked for destruction. The vampirism of the finance industry
and its political elites is sucking out the life of all that is living
on this planet. The exploitation and destruction of nature—which
includes the human race—leaves us with a spectral universe that
will soon be inhabitable for its vampires too. Currently, the real is
suppressed by the (essentially capitalist) universe of speculation,
both in the philosophical sense and in the sense of the speculative
mind of gaming.
Herb Sandler, the co-founder of the mortgage lender
Golden West Financial corporation, which was heavily
loaded with option ARM loans, wrote a letter to officials
at the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, the OTS, and the OCC
warning that regulators were “too dependent” on ratings
agencies and “there is a high potential for gaming when
virtually any asset can be churned through securitization
and transformed into a AAA-rated asset, and when a
multi-billion dollar industry is all too eager to facilitate this
alchemy.15
III. The Economy is Always Already Political
Gaming includes risk, but the type of gaming which grounds the
so-called finance industry does not presuppose risk in the last
instance, i.e. by material defaulting and materially or physically
experienced loss. In the last instance, when the gamers collided
with the rock of the real—the material threat to “their way of life”—
they asked for a government bailout and they got it. Apparently,
there is direct relationship between the banking industry and the
government, at least in the US and in the European Union, as has
been proven since the 2008 financial crash. Intervention of the
state in the affairs of economy that creates use value (apart from
or in addition to the surplus value) is understandable. However,
the motivation of the state to intervene in the so-called finance
industry in order to save it and maintain economic stability is
utterly vague. How does the stability of investment banks and
their funds serve general economic stability, one linked to material
production, consumption, and sustainability?
Investment banking concerns turning investments into
investments, betting on the viability of investments, and selling
those speculations to other investment speculators. It serves
all sorts of funds whose activity comes down to the trade of its
assessment, of the best guess or speculation about of the financial
worth of something which has only indirect or meditated—if
any—material worth. The material determination in the last
15

FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, 48.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 47

instance is not the subject of trade in investment banking, and is
hardly its determination in the last instance.
In the last instance, the investment (and/or banking) industry
has no effect on the real industry (at least not a productive one).
So why is the maintained stability of the finance market so
important for the economic stability of a country? How come it is
more important than the “material industry” or the so-called real
economy? This question departs from the fact that the bailout of
the former takes place at the detriment of the latter.
This resilience led many executives and regulators to
presume the financial system hadachieved unprecedented
stability and strong risk management. The Wall Street
banks’ pivotal role in the Enron debacle did not seem to
trouble senior Fed officials. In a memorandum to the FCIC,
Richard Spillenkothen described a presentation to the
Board of Governors in which some Fed governors received
details of the banks’ complicity “coolly” and were “clearly
unimpressed” by analysts’ findings. “The message to some
supervisory staff was neither ambiguous nor subtle,”
Spillenkothen wrote. Earlier in the decade, he remembered,
senior economists at the Fed had called Enron an example
of a derivatives market participant successfully regulated
by marketdiscipline without government oversight.16
Regardless of the eventual presence/absence of oversight,
government intervention was required and considered legitimate
since it is the government’s responsibility to preserve the economic
stability of a country (and through that of all other forms of social
stability). This means that the use value necessary for life, both
for the physical and “spiritual” (as in Marx’s texts, i.e., as attached
and directly issuing from the physical) survival of the ordinary
citizens, had to be transformed into surplus value that serves the
stability of the financial market. In other words, the material is
annulled by its transformation into the purely speculative. Thus,
the use value is barred by its total transformation into surplus
value and the sole purpose of this process is to sustain a universe
of pure surplus value.
How important is the health of the investment and banking
industry, or the health and stability of hedge funds and insurance
companies, for the survival of the so-called real economy? How
has the crisis of the investment industry really affected the
material production of tangible use value? If the banking industry
can be viewed as an industry in its own right that can remain
16

FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, 60.

48 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

fundamentally detached from the real economy, how important is
it for a country’s stability to insure the survival and preservation of
this autonomous universe? The 2008 financial crisis has certainly
affected all those who have had to default on their house loans
or who have lost social benefits. If that is the case, then the US
Government’s bailout of big investors brought more danger than
stability, and thus: a) a growth of poverty, b) a huge hole in the
national budget, and c) preservation of an “industry,” which not
only does not necessarily support the real economy, but quite to
the contrary, immanently contains the tendency to destroy it (the
real economy) if that brings more profit.
Hartmann‐Wendels et al. (2010, p. 16) define investment
banking as the set of “all functions of a bank, which support
trading at financial markets.” The common opinion in the
literature is that investment banking comprises all services
which serve financial allocation opportunities, as long
as they are provided via securities transactions. Broadly
speaking, investment banks assist “the capital market in its
function of capital intermediation” (Subramanyam, 2008,
p.81). The emergence of financial interm-ediaries is owed
to the market imperfections inherent in financial markets.17

Michael Schroeder et al., The Role of Investment Banking for the German
Economy: Final Report for Deutsche Bank AG, Frankfurt/Main (Mannhelm: Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung, 2011), 12. Chart
represented above also from Schroeder et al., same page.

17

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 49

This is one attempt at explaining the phenomenon of the
“financialization of the economy.” Let us examine what other
possible definitions there are.
IV. The Change of Marx’s Equation
Investment banks do not serve the final beneficiaries of any real
economy (i.e., humanity and other living beings). Since the dawn
of capitalism, and until the emergence of the “finance economy,”
industry has been producing material goods. Its goal has always
been surplus value, and its vector has always been M→M1, by
definition grounded in the production of commodity as the
hybrid of use value and surplus value. Use value has been the
indispensible intermediary in the creation of surplus value. That
is the logic behind the equation M-C-M (money-commoditymoney).
At the turn of the 21st century, investment banking assumed
the status of the unavoidable intermediary for the investors’
main activity (making profit). With the usurpation of the status
of the main intermediary in investing, the banking industry has
suppressed and finally eliminated the production of use value as
the central intermediary for achieving the defining capitalist goal
(represented by the M-C-M equation). Since the investment and
finance industry have assumed the status of an industry in their
own right, and their speculative activity has been assigned the
quality of products exchanged on the market, Marx’s M-C-M has
turned into M-M-M. Commodities produced by the apparently
self-sufficient banking industry are purely financial phenomena
because they originate in the register of speculation that produces
pure signification (money). Commodities produced by the
banking industry bear the names of: securities, derivatives,
certificates, bonds, equities, etc. The M-M-M cycle is detached
from the material and from the primary, secondary, and tertiary
economy that continues to satisfy the material needs of human
and non-human animals. The chasm that has appeared between
the universe of sheer speculation (M-M-M) and that of the
physical world and its immediate needs (to which M-C-M was still
somehow related) will grow. Finally, the founding of the image and
of the tenuous reality of the economic whole the two are presumed
to constitute will become inevitable.
When the 2008 financial crisis was declared, the US government
decided that the financial institutions facing bankruptcy were
“too big to fail” because that would have destabilized the entire
economy and they were “too interconnected with other financial
institutions.”18 Would such eventual failure have affected the real
18

FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, 386.

50 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

economy, in all of its three sectors? Considering that investment
banks are detached from commercial banks and work practically
with no capital, as the US Financial Crisis Inquiry Report informs
the reader (quotes are provided above), exactly how would
the eventual failure of the banking industry have affected the
production of the real economy?
In a collective forum entitled “The Impact of the Financial
Crisis on the Real Economy,” two authors state that, “the cost
of the financial crisis to the real economy has so far remained
underexamined, probably because of the difficulty in making
such an assessment.”19 This study, which is a policy analysis of the
financial crisis’s effects on the European, and more particularly,
the German economy, makes apparent the fact that the impact
of the financial market on the “real market economy” remains a
“rather vague phenomenon.” It is not only vague to the authors
of the study but also to the other academic and non-academic
authorities in the area who are cited in it.
[...] “Finanzdienstleistungsinstitute” is the German
equivalent of investment banks. According to the legal
definition of the functions of financial service providers
(“Finanzdienstleistungsinstitute,” §1a KWG), however,
the term is rather broad as it also includes other financial
service providers besides investment banks. Another issue
is raised by the assignment of some financing activities
closely intertwined with investment banking activities (e.g.
financing of M&A transactions). Although in practice such
financing activities may be considered a part of investment
banking, the widespread definition of investment banking
in academic literature refrains from assigning any financing
functions to the term investment banking. Hartmann‐
Wendels et al. (2010, p. 16) define investment banking as
the set of “all functions of a bank, which support trading at
financial markets.”20
In his book from 2013, Profiting Without Producing, Costas
Lapavitsas claims the same while explaining that the notion of
the “financialization of economy” had never even entered the
vocabulary or conceptual apparatus of mainstream economics.
Nonetheless, this phenomenon has been determining our

19
Daniel Gros and Cinzia Alcidi, “The Crisis and the Real Economy,” in
Forum: The Impact of the Financial Crisis on the Real Economy, Intereconomics: Review of European Economic Policy 45 (2010) [DOI: 10.1007/
s10272-010-0320-0]: 4–10..
20
Gros and Alcidi, “The Crisis and the Real Economy,” 12.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 51

economic reality since 2008.21 Lapavitsas’s book also demonstrates
how the neoliberal economy is essentially enabled by “monopoly
state control over the final means of payment.”
The fact that the role of the “finance economy” was completely
unexamined when the crisis was declared did not prevent the
US government from reacting with bank bailouts, just as it did
not prevent EU governments from reacting with budget cuts and
other forms of state intervention that aimed to preserve “economic
stability.” What in fact being saved was the self-enveloped world of
the financial market, a self-sufficient universe parasitizing off the
rest of society and the economy rather than providing grounds for
their survival and growth. On the other hand, the negative affects
on the real economy, caused by the reduced spending capacity
of the population, were something that could be predicted by
every economist, politician, and ordinary citizen. Therefore, what
is known to be detrimental to economic stability and growth
(material not financial or speculative) was sacrificed in the name
of what is known to be utterly unexamined in respect to its affects
on the real economy. The states which went on to save their
national and the global “financial industries” determined that the
intermediary between money making and more money making
was more important for overall economic stability than the real
economy.
The Enigma of Capital22 by David Harvey offers a genealogy
of the “financialization of economy” and of the financial crisis
which occurred after 2008. According to the evidence presented
by Harvey, deregulation of finance was the cornerstone of the
“new and global financial architecture,” which originated in the
late 1970s and “was accelerated in 1986 and became unstoppable
in the 1990s.”23 Harvey explains that deregulation was a political
invention. It was an intervention of the neoliberal governments
into the banking system, which aimed to bridge “the gap between
what labor was earning and what it could spend.”24 It is interesting to
note that the banks were reluctant to embrace absolute liberalism,
and hence, absence of any regulation. Therefore, Harvey tells us
that “political pressure” had to be used in order to force financial
institutions such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to “loosen the
credit strings for everyone.”25
Costas Lapavitsas debunks the myth about the helpless states
21
Costas Lapavitsas, Profiting Without Producing: How Finance Exploits Us
All (London: Verso, 2013).
22
David Harvey, The Enigma of Capital and the Crisis of Capitalism
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010).
23
Harvey, The Enigma of Capital, 16.
24
Harvey, The Enigma of Capital, 17.
25
Harvey, The Enigma of Capital, 17.

52 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

who are incapable of establishing control over the “out of joint
capitalism” and imagined “elemental forces” of the naturalized
economy. Behind this mirage of unrestrained liberalism lies
the truth of the economic and social policies of nation-states.
The idea of the absolute liberty of the market, or the imaginary
of the natural forces of capital, is made possible by a grounding
metaphysical premise about the “naturalness” of a capitalist free
market economy. Lapavitsas reminds us that economy has always
been political, just as Marx insisted:
Second, crucial to the ascendancy of private credit money has been its legal convertability into state-backed money created by central banks. The latter is a hybrid form of
money: it is partly credit since it is created through credit
mechanisms (mostly lending by the central bank to private
banks); it is partly fiat since it is inconvertible legal tender
that normally rests on the state’s promises to pay. This hybrid form of money is the ultimate lever of state power in
the realm of finance because it allows the state to provide
liquidity and to make payments at critical junctures. Financialization has been stamped by the conscious management of state-backed central bank money through various
mechanisms of the state. Central banks have emerged as a
leading public institution, typically under a façade of independence. The command exercised by states over central
bank money has made sustained intervention in the field of
finance possible throughout the period of financialization.
The importance of control over state-backed credit money was made clear in the course of the global crisis of the
2000s.26
Political pressure that needed to be used in order to install
the “system of neoliberalism” proves that absolute liberty of the
economy and finance industry is not a natural, self-generated
reality. Rather, it is the product of a political decision. Therefore,
it is also the product of philosophical decision. It relies on a
postulation of reality that is essentially philosophical. This means
that one not only postulates cognitively about the real, but also
performs a practical gesture of philosophical intervention where
thought determines what the real/reality is. While determining
the real, the same gesture performs a second subterfuge gesture,
and truth substitutes reality. To explain this “decisionism,” let
us reiterate Laruelle’s thesis, which is that what determines any
and all philosophy in the last instance thereby produces an
amphibology between thought and the real. The most important
26

Lapavitsas, Profiting Without Producing, 70.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 53

product of this amphibology is “the Being.”27 By that same logic,
absolute freedom and its supposed innate self-regulation are
creations of a philosophical decision which surreptitiously and
“amphibologically” instilled in itself as the real, rather than what
it really is—a political (and philosophical) decree.
Through the bailouts of investment banks and budget cuts,
state authorities have strived to preserve a self-sufficient universe
of abstraction called the “finance industry.” This universe of pure
abstraction seems to be based on the original presupposition
that it can survive completely detached from the real or the
material world (= the world of defaulted houses and massively
reduced reproduction of material goods). Is it possible that
this is a philosophical flaw, the result of a mere superstitious
misconception? Is it possible that the origin of the crisis consists
in a philosophical fallacy, according to which the fetish (money)
represents not just a reality but also a worth in its own right rather
than mere mediation between two or more material realities?
George Soros has accused the German Chancellor Angela Merkel
for precisely this—a philosophical fallacy in the ways in which
she has dealt with the crisis (i.e., for “misconceptions and taboos”
which lead to austerity measures against debtor Eurozone countries
such as Greece).28 In a number of interviews and articles, George
Soros, the person who has been one of the main proponents of
the “finance industry,” unraveled the spectral nature of that same
industry which had made him rich. He termed the belief in its
realness a misconception. This point is the undercurrent of a
central set of arguments in his article on the topic, which was
published in October 2013. Let us consider the following quote:
I can testify from personal experience that investors would
flock to Greece once the debt overhang was removed. But
the official sector cannot write down its debt, because that
would violate a number of taboos, particularly for the ECB.
29

Certainly, one can never be sure if Merkel suffers from
“misconceptions” about the nature of the financial market and its
alleged immanently liberal and self-regulating nature, or whether
she has made an informed political decision to stick with the
policies of neo-liberalism. The same dilemma stands for Barack
27
François Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie (Bruxelles-Liege:
Pierre Mardaga, 1989), 42 ff.
28
George Soros, “Angela Merkel’s Pyrrhic Victory,” Project Syndicate, October 7, 2013, http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/george-soroson-angela-merkel-s-pyrrhic-victory.
29
Soros, “Angela Merkel’s Pyrrhic Victory.”

54 | METAPHYSICS OF THE FINANCE ECONOMY

Obama and his financial policies and political decisions related
to the post 2007 crisis. In spite of Soros’s advice to the contrary,
in 2008 Obama decided to bailout the investment banks. George
Soros, one of the most generous financial supporters of Obama’s
electoral campaign in 2008, advised Obama to nationalize the
banks instead, as reported the Wall Street Journal Online.30 It appears
unusual that a finance magnate would opt for nationalization of
banks while a politician decides to opt for a financialization of the
national economy. Once again, it seems viable to claim—and in
this respect, I follow David Harvey’s argument presented above—
that the financialization of global economy is a political project
rather than an economic “natural process”:
Fictitious financial capital took control and nobody wanted
to stop it because everyone who mattered seemed to be
making lots of money. In the US, political contributions
from Wall Street soared. Remember Bill Clinton’s famous
rhetorical question as he took office? ‘You mean to tell
me that the success of the economic program and my reelection hinges on the Federal Reserve and a bunch of
fucking bond traders?’ Clinton was nothing if not a quick
learner.31
In spite of the conscious decision or philosophical ruse to
convince the world that “innate absolute freedom” of finance is
a natural state of affairs, rather than a state’s trick to postpone
decisions regarding real economy (as much as possible or almost
indefinitely), we might be dealing with misconceptions too. In other
words, an informed political decision to pursue neoliberal policies
does not exclude the possibility of uninformed misconceptions
about its “realness” in the world of material production and
reproduction (social, economic and physical). The idea that one
could postpone material reality without material consequences
is probably a misconception, a fallacy of the fundamentally
speculative mind of contemporary capital perpetuating an old
metaphysical hierarchy which accords primacy and supremacy to
the mental (or “the idea”) over the bodily (or “the material”).
In the last instance, the self-sufficient and self-enclosed
universe of speculation (financial and beyond financial) feeds
on the physical world, which it treats as mere material (not
matter) for the (re-)production of abstract values. The role of the
abstraction in the capitalist world is to (re)produce imperfect
matter into numeric perfection (money) and to elevate it to a
Luca Di Leo, “Soros Criticizes Obama’s Bailouts,” The Wall Street Journal, March 1, 2010, http://on.wsj.com/1wXziL2..
31
Harvey, The Enigma of Capital, 17.

30

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 55

level where matter transcends itself by being transformed into
“materialistic value” or “pure materialism.” In spite of the fact that
capitalist abstraction has regularly crashed against the material
wall of natural resources and human labor, it still believes in its
superiority, and hence, the necessity to exploit the physical in order
to produce good in the perfect world of pure value. The capitalist
drive is grounded in a flawed metaphysical presupposition, not
in the greed for the material. Capitalism is “idealistic” rather than
“materialistic.” It does not depart from self-interest; rather, it is moved
by the eschatology of an elevated and sublimated matter that is more
material than matter itself. It is a pursuit of surplus value, rather
than use value, which culminates in the surplus of “pure value.” If
the motor of social processes is pure value (pure meaning or pure
signification), rather than the “immediate interest” (Marx) of the
subjugated, one is still trapped in capitalism as the philosophicalin-the-last-instance. One is trapped in a metaphysical illusion
and cognitive flaw. That is why surpassing capitalism will mean
surpassing philosophy and philosophical metaphysics (since, as
demonstrated above, metaphysics does not necessarily have to be
philosophical).

4: The Metaphysics of Capitalism and
the Socialist Response

I. Metaphysics of Wage Labor as part of Political Theory and Praxis
In L’introduction au non-marxisme, François Laruelle argues that
Marxism, alongside with psychoanalysis, is a science of the human
that non-philosophy seeks to institute and develop. In order for
this to come about one needs to rid the Marxian corpus from its
philosophical tenets: philosophical and historical materialism as
fully developed and self-enveloped system/s of thought and established universes (possible worlds) that are to be enforced. They
provide definite and unquestionable answers to the questions of
private property, the role of the communist state, what commons
are or ought to be, as well as issues of wage labor and what constitutes the proletariat and its rule. Let us remind ourselves, following Laruelle we define decisionism as essentially philosophical. It
entails the procedure of establishing duplicity of the real and the
truth of it, where the latter posits the former. Such is the status and
the procedure of certain concepts central to the Marxist theory, as
interpretation of Marx’s original text, as “dialectical materialism,”
and as a few others mentioned above.
Philosophical thought consistently follows the laws of its doctrine, remaining auto-referential and self-sufficient. For the purposes of dismantling the ossified structures, networks, and other
forms of systematization of thought, non-philosophy applies the
procedure of the radicalization of the argument arriving to its determination in the last instance. For example, according to Laruelle, one has to dismantle the totality of the Marxian authoritative
(i.e., philosophical legacy), in order to arrive at Marx’s own text
as the conceptual point of departure for Marxism. Marx’s text

58 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

ought to be treated as chôra rather than as a foreclosed universe
of truth established as such, due to the inner laws of the operations of thought pertaining to the doctrine. To treat it as chôra
implies a theory that is aligned with praxis as its authority in the
last instance, whereas the concepts of the theory are treated as
mere “transcendental conceptual material.” Aligning with praxis
or with “the real,” in accordance with the non-philosophical procedure of Laruelle, enables the production of a theory (Laruelle)
or science (Marx and Laruelle), which is the result of experientially and empirically established positivity produced around the
symptoms of the real. The symptoms manifest themselves as trauma or tuché experienced physically (the body and mind included).
The non-philosophical procedure of radicalization of a postulate
goes as far as establishing its determination in the last instance,
which is a concept that is by definition affected by the “immanence of the real.”1 Determination in the last instance (détermination-en-dernière-instance or DDI) is a form of the transcendental, i.e. an operation of thought, but nonetheless philosophically
impoverished and transcendentally minimal insofar as it is the
effect of the “syntax of the real.” Essentially, it is a description of
the effect, of the impact of the real, of an intervention of an exteriority which is mere effect, and of trauma that disrupts the automatism of signification (how we habitually think and make sense
out of the world and inhabit it). It is the effect of disruption, of
obliteration of some meanings and of necessitating the creation
of new ones, which is described through determination in the last
instance. It is a description of the effect of the real conducted in
the immanent way (de la manière immanente),2 in a mode of being
affected by the real through the instance of the lived. The instance
of the lived is an immediacy that is only transposed to the level of
the transcendental as the result of an act of linguistic mediation.
In Marx’s text, by virtue of applying the procedure that renders
it transcendental chôra, Laruelle identifies the determination in
the last instance (DDI) of the theory that it seeks to establish - the
notion of labor force. Labor force, the exploitation it entails and its
form specifically, as explained by Marx, determines in the last instance the development of the entire theory and points to the practice that should ensue from it. Those who subscribe to some of the
central tenets of this theory and wish to escape the circularity and
auto-referentiality of philosophy, according to Laruelle, should
theorize in a way in which thought succumbs to the authority of
the real. Such a process is enabled by following the “syntax of the
real” which produces a morphology of thought that is constituted
François Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France), 48.
2
Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme, 10.

1

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 59

by the markers of instances of determination in the last instance of
any transcendental construct in the text (after it has undergone a
procedure of philosophical impoverishment). The chôra of Marx’s
texts does not have to be the only source if the real prompts another conceptual apparatus; other theories are also determined in the
last instance by a certain effect of the real. One can arrive to their
DDI, and thus to their transcendentally impoverished conceptualizations, which can enforce a philosophically nonstandard Marxist argument. However, one should not endorse entire theoretical
edifices, but rather draw on the theoretical chôra.
The conceptualization of the labor force and its status in Marx’s
texts, according to non-standard Marxism, makes the term “labor
force” the determination-in-the-last-instance of Marxism. Being
that it is affected by immanence (or by the real and the lived) also
makes it the source of “thought-force” (Laruelle), or thought that
immediately induces practice.3 Only philosophical auto-alienation of theory can alienate the radical core from the practice and
the lived of labor-force, and from the subjectivities that it determines in the last instance.
If what moves capitalism is the split between use value and
the surplus value, whereby the latter assumes an independent life,
and if the detached abstraction of surplus value re-presented as the
symbolism called “money” can dictate the entire economic-political system by way of subjugating real (or physical) needs, then the
concept of “labor force” is one of the determinations in the last
instance of Marx’s thought. Such is the central claim of Laruelle’s
Introduction au non-marxisme. Alienation from one’s physical and
spiritual needs, as Marx explained, and amphibologically4 positing oneself as a commodity that has to be sold on the market of
wage labor, is the kernel of capitalist exploitation and subjugation.
It is also the lever of the political-economic system of capitalism: it
provides the supply and the demand of money and the commodities that ought to be sold at the same time. Thereby, the means of
the most basic subsistence are also turned into commodities from
wage labor in order to survive and be able to sell itself. In the contradiction of wage labor being both a commodity and the agency
that (auto-)sells that same commodity, one not only can identify
the moving force of the capitalist machine, but also its impossibility and the source of its downfall. The tormented “rented body,”
constantly increasing in distress from exhaustion, bad health, and
ceaseless fear for its survival and the survival of its dependents,
will inevitably crash under the pressure of the theology of money
and bourgeois values. At the peak of the contradiction, the proleLaruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme, 48.
François Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie (Bruxelles-Liege:
Pierre Mardaga, 1989), 42 ff.
3

4

60 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

tariat will not have “values” anymore and will act only according
to emergency to save itself from the suffering tormented body and
soul.
The proletariat is, let us remind ourselves, everyone who lives
on the basis of wage labor and everyone who has to sell his or
her labor as a commodity. “Proletariat is recruited from all classes
of the population,” states the Communist Manifesto.5 Contrary to
most criticisms, I would say that the “Occupy Wall Street” slogan,
which opposes 99% of the population to the 1%, does have a real
addressee. However, it has failed to mobilize hardly 1% of those
99% because we are all bearers of the capitalist philosophy that
leads us to believe in what is in fact a religious-moralist premise
at the origin of the capitalist world: it is due to our own “inbuilt
deficiency” (to be able to succeed) that we have “failed” to become
“more like those 1%.”
The belief that through wage labor one can “succeed,” and that
enormous wealth is the natural result of (or reward for) a success
of such scale, is what keeps us enslaved in the ruling capitalist logic
and paralyses any possibility of revolt. So, the totems of “success,”
“hard work,” and the naturalization of capitalism that elevates
its logic to an onto-theological instance of being “the infallible
judgment of the ‘real’ world” against which our worth (not only
financial but moral and even ontological) is measured, keeps us
entrapped in the philosophical. The urgency to cease the suffering
of the tormented body and replace it with joy will act as the real —
as “the lived” (Laruelle) and as “the event” (Badiou)—which shall
burst asunder the mirror-world of surplus value, that universe of
pure abstraction and operations of speculation called capitalism.
I.1. Wage Labor as Abstract Labor and its Realist
Alternatives
Wage labor and rented life must be replaced by forms of labor
which are not alienated and self-alienating, which are founded
upon some materiality, are filled with substance, and are determined by some real in the last instance, but not by the abstraction
of labor force. If in the choice of a profession or vocation, the pleasure or the mere feeling more at home with one job rather than another is respected, and the right to it is guaranteed, labor becomes
concrete, material, and real, in the sense that one is not alienated
from it. It is also real because it is not an abstraction—as in labor
force as a cognitive creation, a pure concept—but a tangible reality,
5
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, “Manifesto of the Communist Party,” in
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1: 1845-1859 (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1969), available at https://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 61

physical and sensuous. In that way, the talk of labor, its economic
theorizations and political considerations, will be conditioned and
determined in the last instance by the real. In such way, we will not
achieve mere theoretical satisfaction of having established a realist
discourse. The goal is also practical, as it consists of ensuring that
“human resources planning”, “life-long learning policies” (such as
those of the EU), and other political and scientific operations that
shape our realities will be more realistic.
Participation in social production is fundamentally different
from wage labor, which is rented participation, as through the
process of labor renting itself it schizophrenically splits. It acts as a
commodity, albeit being the force that produces objects which become commodities as soon as they are alienated from one’s labor
and from their use value, and as soon as they turn into numbers
(figures, prices). Such contradictions, according to Marx, lead to
the preponderance of the tendency that is materially grounded,
and as a consequence, to the disappearance of the one which is determined in the last instance by speculation. Materially, in terms
of the reality of production, wage labor is force of production.
Unilaterally defined, it is the source of commodity creation. Only
on the level of the abstract, and only through the process of the
fetishization of signification or of the speculation of worth, it is
turned into and re-presents itself as commodity. The sheer physical
or sensuous interest of the human-in-human will eventually thrust
against the narrative of wage labor as a measurement of “success”
and “dignified life” (both bourgeois concepts that could be radicalized in terms of non-Marxism). The shriek for a bearable life
will silence the talk of bourgeois happiness and how it ought to be
earned or lost. Participation in social production is the foundation
for the survival of a society and its technological development.
However, the right to life is a given by nature, and the conatus for
survival is the unconditional claim to this right. Therefore, society
cannot condition the right to life since it would be a speculative
claim against the brute materiality of the struggle for survival.
The right to life should be unconditionally granted to every living
being—both human and animal—which means sufficient food,
housing, heating, and “physical and spiritual wellbeing.” Participation in social production should bring rewards which increase
what Marx would call physical and spiritual wellbeing. In order to
participate in a society, one should be required to participate in
the production, according to one’s substantive (material) interests,
competences, and the sense of “feeling at home” with one’s work.
However, those who are unable to respond to this requisite should
not be deprived of the right to life exercised as “life-increasing”
activity or pleasure (Spinoza).
Wage labor is temporary, unstable; in fact, mobility, i.e. the
socially and economically enforced compulsion of changing jobs

62 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

or professions, are the cause of constant stress. One is pressed to
constantly treat oneself as insufficiently competent, to constantly
train oneself for some new job (that he or she might never get), to
acquire new competencies, to even learn how to love the next job
(and often fail at it), and to fear losing it. The “labor market mobility” in the age of neoliberalism entails doing a literally alien job,
and maintaining an alienated stance to it (not to “get too attached
to it,” since one might have to “move on”). Constant instability
reinforces the sense of being estranged, de-realized, un-real, and
a stranger (often enemy) to oneself. Because of this, capitalism’s
mode of exploitation is profoundly brutal since it creates self-exploiting subjects of the workforce. Stability of the workplace is the
necessary requirement for abolishing wage work as rented life.
“Mobility,” or the possibility of change in the life-increasing activity aspect (in Spinozian sense), should be made available. Nonetheless, it ought to cease to be imposed through policies of the states
of corporate capital, which leaves no space for other options. Let
us note that neoliberal labor mobility has a twofold sense: if workers are not mobile, their employers are, by moving to other corners
of the “labor market world.”
Stability is spatial and presupposes attachment to material
conditions. The speed of the self-accelerating sheer abstraction
that exploits and auto-exploits is radically slowed down by the
brute materiality that ensures its stability. Benjamin Noys argues
that resistance of the “Occupy” type, which operates with spatial
strategies (sit-ins, occupation of public spaces and buildings, etc.),
is one that subverts the temporal methodology of the neoliberal
capitalist state.6 A call for occupation of the workplace, as topos
(of the socio-political realm), and as space in the literal sense, is
a resistance strategy that builds well on the new forms of revolt
and revolution carried out by “the rebel cities” that David Harvey
writes about. 7 Stability or grounding in the materiality of labor
provides stability and growth in the real economy as social reproduction, but also as production and technological growth (as
means of emancipation of the humankind and of effective protection of other forms of life on the planet). The core of capitalism is
the “waging of labor,” which is the central mechanism of exploitation. It is also the grounding act of instituting the capitalist and
bourgeois universe as one of speculation out of joint. Immanent,
realist, or materialist revolt is one against exploitative abstraction
of labor that is possible only by way of subjugating, tormenting,
6
Benjamin Noys, “The War of Time: Occupation, Resistance, Communization,” Identities: Journal for Politics, Gender and Culture 10.1-2 (2013):
83-92.
7
David Harvey, Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution (London: Verso, 2013).

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 63

and exploiting the body of the human animal. The revolt of the
proletariat should consist of “all classes of the population,” or the
revolt of the laborers should be directed against the tormented
body of the laborer and other animals.
If the source of capitalist exploitation is wage labor that alienates work and its fruits from the worker, the core of capitalist
world order consists in some grounding dispossession of humankind (and of other animals too). It is a dispossession from one’s
work and one’s immediate “physical and spiritual” interests, and
it is against this form of dispossession that socialism (and communism) revolt in order to offer an alternative to it. A form of repossession of one’s “real,” “physical,” and “sensuous” labor and its
fruits is one of the central goals of Marx’s communist vision. Marx
is very explicit that the essence of communism is: “reintegration
or return of man to himself, the transcendence of human self-estrangement,” as well as grasping “the positive essence of private
property, and [...] the human nature of need.”8 Gaining possession
of one’s work and its fruits, aligned with one’s immediate needs or
interests that have “transcended self-alienation,” repossessing oneself is the main goal of communism, says Marx. The intimation of
this claim is that the idea of possession, and hence, property, needs
to be reinvented by recourse to the chôra of Marx’s concepts.
I.2. Abstraction, Philosophical and Speculative Economies and the Subjugation of the Body
Let us remind ourselves of a passage by Marx, quoted in Chapter
2. Marx describes here the physical reality of the exploited body
(and mind) of the wage laborer in the following way:
[...] the worker becomes ever more exclusively dependent on labour, and on a particular, very one-sided, machine-like labour at that. Just as he is thus depressed spiritually and physically to the condition of a machine and
from being a man becomes an abstract activity and a belly,
so he also becomes ever more dependent on every fluctuation in market price.9
By becoming an abstract activity and a belly, the worker beKarl Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in
Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 (Moscow:
Progress Publishers, 1959), available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/
marx/works/1844/manuscripts/comm.htm.
9
Karl Marx, “First Manuscript: Wages of Labor,” in Marx, Economic and
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, available at https://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/wages.htm.
8

64 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

comes ever more dependent on every fluctuation of market price.
The workings of abstraction produce a split and vulnerable self.
Vulnerability makes the subject of wage labor dependent on precisely what subjugates it, splits it, and renders it vulnerable—which
is the labor market itself. Fluctuation or job instability is therefore
the source and the prime mover of exploitation and the deepening
sense of suffering. The more vulnerable one is, the more dependent one is on precisely what exploits him or she, and vice versa.
The neoliberal acceleration of the Machine of Capital, carried out
through measures of absolute specul(ariz)ation of its operations,
has deprived labor of all materiality—rendering it pure abstraction or labor force “in general,” with “transferable” rather than
substantive skills and knowledge. Through its educational policies
aligned with the needs of the labor market, the European neoliberal post-nation state aims to ensure mobility from one workplace
to another by way of constant re-training and re-education. In this
way, precariousness becomes the defining feature of the workforce
today, regardless of whether employed or unemployed (the unemployed or the “underemployed” are merely the ever growing
“workers reserve army” that Marx wrote of).10 Alongside the processes of de-realization of economy, executed through the introduction of the absolute rule of the “finance industry,” an unstoppable
acceleration of the de-realization of labor has been instituted.
De-realization invokes a sense of “non-existence,” a sense of
social invisibility, and fundamental helplessness that induces social-political disempowerment. As a consequence, the army of
workers (both active and in reserve) are immobilized as a political
and social force in their own right. In immobilization via disempowerment, one should add the sense of confusion with regard to
the source of the general state of precariousness affecting the contemporary labor force. By way of the amphibology established between thought and the real, originating from the philosophical decision on what constitutes reality, the worker of the neoliberal and
postmodern era is constituted as pure signification (a concept) of
abstract labor, which can take on any material form depending
on the “dictate of the laws of the labor market.” Therefore, she or
he becomes convinced that there is no reality beyond the reality
of sign and representation, and that material substance is mere
material of the higher conceptual reality of “ideas” which molds
it. Consequently, the body should endure suffering in the name of
Karl Marx, “Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital Simultaneously with the Progress of Accumulation and of the Concentration that Accompanies It,” in Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political
Economy, Vol. I: The Process of Production of Capital (Moscow: Progress
Publishers, 1887), available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1867-c1/ch25.htm#S2.

10

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 65

“values,” “goals,” “lifestyle,” and in the name of “self-perfection.”
Re-education, the search for the “right job,” or the constant attempt at yet another job boil down to accepting precariousness as
“the call” (of the “natural laws of society”) to demonstrate one’s
abilities and faculties (to survive and “advance” in terms of career).
The capitalist nation-state is constituted by citizens. In it, the
citizen’s self is constituted as modern, enlightened, and consequently, bourgeois. In the free world of economy, the worker’s self
is radically individual, autonomous, and endowed with self-mastery. Therefore, exploitation is not an exterior reality to the modern (and post-modern) bourgeois subjectivity of the citizen - it is
a sign of one’s failure to compete and succeed on the labor market
and in the world of capitalist accumulation of wealth. In the last
instance, the bourgeois self is constituted as potentially capitalist
rather than actually capitalist, and the potential and always already
failed capitalist is a member of the proletariat. Hence, the unemployed worker has no outside enemy, seeing himself or herself as
the failed capitalist rather than a proletarian. Therefore, there is no
class-consciousness among the totality of wage-laborers (which
equals the 99% of the “Occupy Wall Street” slogans). For example,
instead of revolt, one reacts to unemployment or underemployment with shame. One does not see subjugation and exploitation
as the result of some instance of the real, or of an exterior factor
(with respect to the real one is in her/his last instance), but rather
as the result of one’s own lack of capacity to succeed, and therefore
of one’s lack of “worth” as a person. The myopia of this sort is enabled by capitalism-as-philosophy, i.e. by the speculative postulation of reality that surreptitiously replaces the instance of the real
and acts in its stead. Instead of recognizing one’s most immediate,
physical “interests,” one pursues abstractions of “success” and “a
worthy self.” Therefore, one finds her or himself combating specters of re-presentation, rather than the material force that subjugates him or her. One is radically detached from one’s immediate,
physical, and material interests to the extent of discarding their
alarms as “noise” or mere disturbance of “the inferior instincts”
that one needs to transcend in order to succeed.
The materialistic stance of the capitalist subject, embodied by
both the wage laborer and the capitalist, is marked by an anorexic treatment of the physical. Namely, the material is indeed the
only thing that can make the capitalist subject happy. However,
immersing into it without control or allowing it to devour you
through pleasure (and pain) renders the material meaningless “mere matter.” It matters when it is fetishized as money, as a trophy wife, as a sculpted (instead of a mere) body, as sex that is not
organs and fluids but a representation, or as a home that is not
(just) a home but an important element of hyper-stylization of
one’s life. If the material does not satisfy the fantasized fetishistic

66 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

expectations, its immediate, unruly, primitive needs are treated as
mere defect, and their urgencies are (expected to be) subjected to
self-control by the subject.
Capitalist materialism is about an absolute mastery of the
mind over the material, it presupposes the hierarchy between matter and mind where the latter is superior to the former. A materialism of this sort is contradictory. Indeed, capitalism is not materialistic, but quite to the contrary: speculation and abstraction rule
the physical in an absolute and despotic way. Just as the laborer’s
body is a tortured body, so is that of the animal, in mass industries, and in nature as a whole. The cruelty of capitalism consists
in the capacity to fully rationalize any suffering of the body as well
as the relentless exploitation of all organic life. The absolute rule
of humanity and its reason is no different than the rule of Hegel’s
Spirit whose aim is not only the absolute subjugation of Nature,
but also its destruction in the name of the reign of the “pure reason.” This apocalyptic eschatological vision is explicitly advocated
in the Phenomenology of the Spirit.11
Speculation and operations of thought or of the transcendental (Laruelle) are at the heart of technological progress, of contemporary “management” of economy, and the “governance” of
society. Speculation is at the core of the political power. However,
in order for these workings of thought to have an effect on the reality, it is necessary that they are materialized, executed through,
or upon the physical. In order for them to be realized, in order for
them to become real, they have to create a material, physical effect.
In order to realize the vision of a world of the absolute rule of technology and of pure rationalism, an intervention into the organic
is required with the purpose of erasing, re-inventing, and finally
substituting the naturally created material with the one which is
the product of human appropriation and re-production of matter
(both organic and inorganic). The eschatology of technology and
the rational mind of enlightenment consist of a vision of the perfect re-production of nature with the paradoxical goal of arriving
to the absolute of nature (one that can be executed by the human
mind). Within this eschatological vision, the mind is understood
in conformity with the Cartesian legacy, i.e. as something not only
radically detached from but also opposed to the organic.
As explained in the previous chapters, for Marx, the notions of
the physical, sensual, material, and the real are interchangeable. I
subscribe to Lacan’s and Laruelle’s understanding of the real as the
effect or modality of reality manifested in the form of trauma or
tuché. The term tuché comes from the ancient Greek word meanMarx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
11

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 67

ing both “accident” and “encounter.” The real “takes place” only in
the form of a thrust into and a disruption of the signifying chain.
In short, the real is the exteriority to thought, “the out there” to
human subjectivity determined in the last instance by language. It
is unruly; it lacks form and meaning. It is an unexpected, elemental intervention of “what makes no sense” into the/a universe of
sense and meaning and the world. Making sense out of its affects
is operating with the re-presentation of the real, not with the real
itself. Thus, although workings of thought create effects of the real,
when they assume the status of the real, they make no sense and
are as elemental as the vulgar real of nature.
Although nature is a reality that can be technically reproduced
and intervened upon, it is first and foremost the radical exteriority to thought, regardless of whether we are dealing with “nature
proper,” or its synthetic technological re-production. The pretension of thought to act in the stead of the real, and in particular
of nature, is essentially philosophical and speculative. Therefore,
invading nature with reason is analogous to mind’s oppressive and
exploitative control and subjugation of the body, one based on the
old Greek, Christian, and Cartesian dichotomy and hierarchy between body and mind.
Nature, the physical, and the sensuous, are the real in the last
instance since they are determined by their being outside of what
makes sense, by their being the thrust of tuché into the automaton
of signification (the human mind). Concepts can also assume the
status of the real if they act as an exteriority by virtue of producing
material conditions for the thinking subject that seeks to grasp it
(in the double sense of the word).
Thus, in order to be a materialist not a rationalist—and a communist, as capitalism is about rationalism rather than materialism—one has to make a metaphysical choice of assigning a different status to the material within the frame of the given dichotomy.
Or, following Laruelle, one can dismantle the dichotomy itself as
essentially philosophical, or abstract and argue for “dualization”12
whereby thought and the real are seen in their unilaterality as
radically distinct categories. The realist (and materialist) thought
succumbs to the authority of the real, rather than to the always
already auto-referential universe of philosophy. A truly materialist
thought will not be moved by the pretension to fully subjugate the
body, but will rather respond to its effects of resistance—to the
thrust of irrationality into the translucent sense of abstraction that
capitalist bourgeois society consists of. The inferior position of the
body in the body-mind hierarchy is what enables the capitalist exploitation of lives in the name of an abstraction. It is for this reaFrançois Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie (Liege-Bruxelles:
Pierre Mardaga 1989), 93–95.

12

68 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

son that a communist revolution to overthrow capitalism entails
a process of coming to terms with some metaphysical presuppositions, those that preserve the superior, masterful, and exploitative position of mind or “the Idea.” Such choice is political, but
also one determined by a realist epistemic stance that is essentially
non-philosophical both in the Marxian and Laruellian sense. In
the last instance, realist thought succumbs to the authority of the
real rather than to a philosophical system.
Nature, the organic, and the bodily, as the exteriority par excellence with regard to thought manifested as trauma, is what the
realist, materialist, and Marxian thought succumbs to in the last
instance, rather than to a philosophy or to a political program
(which is the same as philosophy). The ambition to surreptitiously
replace the unruly reality (of nature) with a speculative universe
which pretends to be the real will inevitably be undercut by a
thrust of “what makes no sense,” caused by either “ecological catastrophes,” by the trauma of the lived, or of the real as embodied
pain that the human in the last instance is (i.e. by the revolting victim). The “out there” that is presumably material is always already
“nature.” According to Anthony Paul Smith, thought necessarily
presupposes nature as its cognitive regulatory and organizational
principle:
The thought can never become unnatural; it is never not a
real idea and what is real is natural. Thought can have real
effects, but cannot affect the Real; thought can think the
unnatural, but it does not do so unnaturally.13
Nature, says Anthony Paul Smith, is one of “the first names of
the real.” The only real we (meaning us, the humans and our subjectivities) encounter is that which comes from the physical world.
The most radical form of transcendental transposition of the
realm of “the encountered, physical out-there” is the concept of
“nature” in its least scientific, least philosophically informed, radically descriptive (Laruelle), and commonsensical form of “manifest image (Sellars). As any transcendental, nature too potentially
engenders its philosophical re-appropriations. The classical, most
authoritative, and most enduring philosophical postulation of nature is the one that has produced the hierarchy between the physical (material) and the mind (idea), while simultaneously declaring
it (the hierarchy) the foundation of any viable philosophy on any
of the two components of the binary. According to this hierarchy,
from Aristotle to Descartes, and the Enlightenment to 21st century
ideas of sciences and morals, matter/nature is the inferior term in
13
Anthony Paul Smith, A Non-Philosophical Theory of Nature: Ecologies of
Thought (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 15.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 69

the hierarchy. Within the frame of this binary, inferiority seems to
function as an invitation to exploitation and subjugation. Hence,
nowadays we rarely speak of nature (except in romantic and recreational idioms), but rather of “natural resources” and ecology,
whose primary goal is to provide “sustainability” of these resources. When the authoritative discourses of politics and science refer
to nature in the second decade of the 21st century, they invoke a
speculative entity that perpetuates exploitation in the name of the
absolute speculation—contemporary capitalism.
No, nature is not veiled, but thinking this allows our regional knowledges to think that they can unveil nature,
that they can touch and circumscribe nature with thought
and thereby either exploit her for our own gain or save her.
Our contemporary climate, both in the physical and intellectual sense, is determined by a single force: the neoliberal
capitalist ideology that demands everything reduce its value to the quantitative measure of money so that it can produce more of this measure. Nature, though, appears to be
purposely deviating from what is accepted as good, proper,
or reasonable in capitalist society. Nature itself appears to
be refusing to go away, to separate itself off from “culture”
and the human person, and insists on inhering to every
part of culture and within every human person, and it resists bowing before capitalism’s demand, to be measured
as something relative rather than the radical condition for
any relative measurement.14
Exploitation and alienation are made possible by the procedure
of alienating nature (or the physical and the material) through
speculation, which renders it a resource to the goal of “economic
growth,” the highest purpose of the totality of human activity in
the universe of capitalism. The goal of communism is establishing
complete unity of man with nature, argues Marx:
The human aspect of nature exists only for social man; for
only then does nature exist for him as a bond with man—
as his existence for the other and the other’s existence for
him—and as the life-element of human reality. Only then
does nature exist as the foundation of his own human existence. Only here has what is to him his natural existence
become his human existence, and nature become man for
him.15
Smith, A Non-Philosophical Theory of Nature, 14–15.
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.

14

15

70 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

However, it is the “human aspect” of nature which “exists only
for social man,” and not the nature in itself or “per se” that one
establishes unity with. The human aspect of nature is lived by “the
social man” in the form of a “bond with men” (Marx)16. In this
sense, nature is not an object of scientific thought, but rather a
material (“physical and sensuous”) existence.
Alienation from oneself is alienation from the physical (“natural”) bond with fellow “social men.” Communism seeks to restore
the sense of immediacy, the physicality of this bond, by turning
abstraction into the “lived” (Laruelle).
II. The Status of Property in Marx’s Texts: An Attempt
to Conceptualize Property beyond the Private/Public
Binary as conceived by the Modern (and “Post-Modern”)
Bourgeois State and its Economic Systems
There are two modes of property Marx writes about in Philosophical and Economic Manuscripts of 1844: property as such (in linguistic terminology: synchronic conceptualization) and the bourgeois conception of property (property in the historical and material context of capitalist modernity). However, the generic concept
of “property” in Marx takes shape and specific determination in
a historical and material context. One can derive the genericity
of the concept for cognitive purposes. However, the derived concept is not self-sufficient and does not constitute a reality in its
own right. Quite the contrary, the real of property is always and
necessarily historically determined. The abstraction “property,”
as a general and ahistorical category, and the tendency to abolish
“property in itself,” is politically and socially meaningless. “Private property,” as conceived in the bourgeois and capitalist state, is
what communism seeks to transcend or abolish:
The antithesis between lack of property and property, so
long as it is not comprehended as theantithesis of labour
and capital, still remains an indifferent antithesis, not
grasped in its active connection, in its internal relation,
not yet grasped as a contradiction. It can find expression
in this first form even without the advanced development
of private property (as in ancient Rome, Turkey, etc.). It
does not yet appear as having been established by private
property itself. But labour, the subjective essence of private
property as exclusion of property, and capital, objective labour as exclusion of labour, constitute private property as
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.

16

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 71

its developed state of contradiction—hence a dynamic relationship driving towards resolution.17
Capital relies on the abstraction of labor and its alienation
from the worker. In capitalism, private property is conditioned by
the process of alienation of labor. Anti-capitalist struggle seeks to
overcome private property that is conditioned by the contradiction of one’s labor that is not one’s own, to enable the return of
work to the worker, to transform (abstract) labor back to work,
and to turn private property into possession of one’s work and its
fruits. Possession and property are distinct categories, the latter
being conditioned by legal relations, argues Marx in Critique of
Political Economy:
Hegel, for example, correctly takes ownership, the simplest
legal relation of the subject, as the point of departure of the
philosophy of law. No ownership exists, however, before the
family or the relations of master and servant are evolved,
and these are much more concrete relations. It would, on
the other hand, be correct to say that families and entire
tribes exist which have as yet only possessions and not property [...]. One can conceive an individual savage who has
possessions; possession in this case, however, is not a legal
relation.18
If the communist alternative to private property is common
possession (or, in its legal form, common property), community
must not be conceived as an abstraction, leaving the individual
alienated from what is commonly owned or consumed. Communism is about “reintegration or return of man to himself, the transcendence of human self-estrangement,” argued Marx.19 The sense
or the sensuous experience of ownership, or unalienated access
to the fruits of human society’s production, must belong to the
individual not to the society. However, the latter is an impossibility since the society that is not materialized on individual level is
abstraction:
The first positive annulment of private property—
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
18
Karl Marx, “Introduction,” in Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, trans. S.W. Ryazanskaya (London: Lawrence
& Wishart, 1971), available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1859/crtique-pol-economy/appx1.htm.
19
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
17

72 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

crude communism—is thus merely a manifestation of the
vileness of private property, which wants to set itself up as
the positive community system. “(2) Communism (α) still
political in nature—democratic or despotic; (β) with the
abolition of the state, yet still incomplete, and being still affected by private property, i.e., by the estrangement of man.
In both forms communism already is aware of being reintegration or return of man to himself, the transcendence of
human self-estrangement; but since it has not yet grasped
the positive essence of private property, and just as little
the human nature of need, it remains captive to it and infected by it. It has, indeed, grasped its concept, but not its
essence.20
Regulation of the commonality of possession, or communal
participation in possession, is the organizational backbone of a
communist society. The real communist regulation enables immediacy, as it meets what Marx calls the real interests of the “physical,
spiritual, and sensuous human” (Marx), and thus fulfills the central concern of communism (“reintegration or return of man to
himself, the transcendence of human self-estrangement”).21 The
Leninist, and its consequent historical derivation of state apparatus, being conceived according to the philosophical authority
of the party doctrine, produces even deeper alienation than the
bourgeois state; the idea of the proletariat becomes an abstraction
and requires philosophical competence in order to be interpreted.
By delegating the authority of defining its place and role in society and history to the Party and its ideological masters, i.e. the
owners of truths who were endowed with the right to mastering/
ruling, the proletariat becomes alienated from its essence, or the
substance designated as determined it in the last instance to be a
proletarian. The communal participation in possession or access
to that which satisfies the proletarian’s material and spiritual interests is mediated, controlled, and disciplined by the Party and the
state apparatus. The state apparatuses of the so-called communist
regimes in the 20th century are an abstraction of the “proletarian
will,” and only by virtue of this fact do they contradict the definition of communist society as posited by Marx (as shared above).
State ownership of production forces and resources are not the
same as public ownership (understanding the term “public” in its
generic sense, one which can be trans-historically applied).
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
21
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
20

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 73

Marx himself never proposed a specific vision of societal organization that would enable commonality of possession or ownership in the non-bourgeois and non-capitalist sense. Considering that the Leninist vision was materialized as an alienating and
oppressive state apparatus, and considering that Marx did not
provide a recipe for how to organize, structure, or manage public or communal ownership, it is the task of the communists of
the 21st century to conceive of communist societal (and political-economic) organization/s in accordance with its own historical context/s. With the core of the communist vision being “overcoming of alienation,” commonality should be conceived in terms
of providing a sense and materiality of individual ownership over
something common or communal. One can take the example of
Wikipedia: the reality that it is owned by everyone who desires to
participate in its ownership is enabled by the actual sense that he
or she can claim it as their own, along with billions of other people on the planet. Therefore, instead of abolishing property and
all forms of individual ownership, the meaning of ownership and
property should be reinvented along the lines of the main Marxian
concern—transcending alienation. The notion of “private” invites
a communist reinvention too—reconceptualization in the sense of
providing an individual sense of participation in the commons, an
immediate and non-alienating experience of having the right to
consume and produce, and a sense of immediacy which is a sense
of being at home with it, of “owning” it, and “being intimate” with
it. This type of experience offers a sense of privacy, or privacy in
its ownership. It is opposite to a sense of dispossession, which is
identical to that of alienation. In line with Marx’s definition of the
main goal of communism, private ownership can be reinvented
as ownership, and privacy in ownership, which is not based on
exploitation, commodification, and private property, as opposed
to commons and wage labor.
The Communist Manifesto advocates abolition of the family.
However, that does not mean that it calls for the abolition of all
forms of family or kinship, only of the bourgeois one. Analogically, it also advocates abolition of private property, but that does not
mean that it calls for the abolishment of all forms of ownership, or
of all forms of privacy or individuality with respect to ownership.
It calls upon transcendence of those forms of private property that
are based in exploitation and the alienation of human nature. To
put it differently, it envisions and calls for the establishment of a
new form of ownership, one in alignment with nature representing the appropriation of “human essence,” which is in its last instance material:
Communism as the positive transcendence of private property as human self-estrangement, and therefore as the real appropriation of

74 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

the human essence by and for man; communism therefore as
the complete return of man to himself as a social (i.e., human)
being—a return accomplished consciously and embracing the
entire wealth of previous development. This communism, as
fully developed naturalism, equals humanism, and as fully developed humanism equals naturalism; it is the genuine resolution
of the conflict between man and nature and between man and
man—the true resolution of the strife between existence and
essence, between objectification and self-confirmation, between
freedom and necessity, between the individual and the species.
Communism is the riddle of history solved, and it knows itself
to be this solution.22
To prohibit the immediate sense of individual ownership of
the process of production is alienating, and against “human nature” as defined by Marx. The goal of communism is “fully developed naturalism.” Mediation of ownership through structured
collectivity that is regulated by law, law/legality being the founding
determination of property, is irrevocably alienating. Therefore, the
individual sense of ownership of the process of production must
be enabled by the regulating apparatus of a society based on the
principle of the commonality of resources and social reproduction. Communist society is an eschatological vision of radical
transcendence of human estrangement. Hence, an abstract social self enabled by the self-negating or self-nullifying individual
subject would be in contradiction with the central promise of the
communist horizon.
In such a case, one would face once again, although in a reverse
or perverse form, capitalist ownership where the collective establishes itself as the “universal capitalist,” and the individual subject
must transcend alienation through its realization as a “species being.”23 The human as a species being is fundamentally a social being, argues Marx. Thus, a non-alienated individual is the basis for
a non-alienating society, and vice versa; the non-alienating society
enables a non-alienated life for the human individual. The dialectics at stake is one that we find in Foucault—the subject enables
a certain societal structure and discourse-power, just as much as
that very structure conditions the subject. The dilemma on the
primacy of “the doer and the deed” is a false one. It is a collective
dynamism of creating subjectivities that take place outside the dualistic logic that intimates the necessity of demiurgic active subjectivity, and the sterile passive objectivity of the created. If we look
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
23
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
22

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 75

at this process from a non-philosophically unilateral perspective,
each individual is determined in the last instance as species-member, permitting him/her to act as both individual and social being
at the same time, without temporal priority of either of the two
modalities of existence. Hence, ownership of both production and
its fruits (as well as the access to their consumption) ought to be
both individual and social, in line with the following principle of
communism conceived as the “genuine resolution of the conflict
between man and nature and between man and man—the true
resolution of the strife between existence and essence, between
objectification and self-confirmation, between freedom and necessity, between the individual and the species.”24
In Volume 1 of Capital, Marx argues that not all private property is the same, saying, “as these private individuals are labourers or not labourers, private property has a different character.”25
“Parceling of soil and of the productive forces of a society” is the
problematic aspect of petty industry and pre-capitalist agriculture
that is based on the private ownership of the means of production
by the individual laborer. Marx advocates full re-socialization of
the laborer’s ownership of their means of production after the inevitable historical stage of capitalism has passed, arguing that such
a process:
[...] does not re-establish private property for the producer,
but gives him individual property based on the acquisition
of the capitalist era: i.e., on cooperation and the possession
in common of the land and of the means of production.
The transformation of scattered private property, arising
from individual labour, into capitalist private property is,
naturally, a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the transformation of capitalistic
private property, already practically resting on socialized
production, into socialized property. In the former case, we
had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few
usurpers; in the latter, we have the expropriation of a few
usurpers by the mass of the people.26
Here, Marx argues that individual property is distinct from
private property, but also that communist individual property
Karl Marx, “Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation,” in Marx,
Capital, Vol. I, available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1867-c1/ch32.htm.
25
Marx, “Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation,” in Marx, Capital, Vol. 1.
26
Marx, “Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation,” in Marx, Capital, Vol. 1.
24

76 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

does not entail ownership of the means of production. Land and
means of production should be subject to “possession in common.” In an imagined communist universe, individual property
persists in the mode of commonality, or in the substance of active
participation in the common sense and reality of ownership.
The chôra of Marx’s text invites us to invent modes of possession of commonality that will not erase the individual sense and
reality of ownership, and will be based on non-alienated labor (by
way of non-alienated relations to the means of production). Particularly after 1989, we know that we have to reinvent the communist state. We also know that the mere appropriation of the
means and resources of production by the state guarantees neither
commonality nor transcendence of workers’ alienation from their
labor as the goal of communism, as stated by Marx. If we want the
reestablishment of the “communist horizon”27 in the 21st century
to be one executed in accordance with the real, rather than with or
as philosophy, we ought to proceed by way of aligning (in the last
instance) with the dictate of the real, rather than with the inner
logic of Marx’s opus.
III. Political Aspects of the Economy of Commonalities:
The Acceleration of 21st Century Capitalism Toward a
Society with Free Associations of Producers
III.1. Dispelling the Illusion of the Neoliberal Weak State
The organization of social production beyond the principle of private property qua property based on wage labor needs to be conceived in terms of a given historical and material context. There is
no single form of commonality, beyond historical context and the
real conditions that it generates. Any form of commonality that
transcends the praxis of historically determined conditioning circumstances are an abstraction, and idea hovering independently
from the material universe. In the first decade of the 21st century,
we possess active memory of the reign and demise of “the communist states” of the mid 20th century in Eastern and Central Europe.
By inertia, we tend to imagine the state-owned commons of those
states as the model of socialist commonality in ownership.
If we submit to the dictate of the real of the material and immaterial conditions of our contemporaneity, the concept of commonality that we would generate would follow the “syntax of the
real” as the conditioning of its possibilities. We live in an era of
accelerated capitalism, in capital’s “bubbles” and “financial crises,”
which, as we already tried to demonstrate, exist in an almost par27

J Jodi Dean, The Communist Horizon (London: Verso Books, 2012).

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 77

allel fashion to the real economy of the deregulating neoliberal
politico-economic doctrine. The alleged deregulation of the neoliberal economy is in fact a product of a meticulous scientifically,
ideologically, politically, and technocratically elaborated methodology of control, masquerading as the manifestation of the anarchic natural laws of the free market economy. We live in an era in
which states bailout banks with the money collected through taxes
paid by wage laborers. The “weak state” of neoliberalism is stronger and more economically disciplining and socially ruthless than
any other form of a bourgeois state that we have witnessed in the
second half of the 20th century. In addition to the bank bailouts by
the state, let us note that “austerity measures” are one of the most
prominent features of the post-2008 economy in Europe.
In short, there is no such thing as a natural or apolitical economy. The economy is always already political, as it is the economy’s
material core of power, control, and its main mechanisms—i.e.
exploitation and oppression. It is no less so in the era of neoliberalism, a time in which we witness the divorce between capitalism
and democracy. The divorce is scandalous as we see totalitarian
states, such as China, Russia, and Turkey as the new economic superpowers, ever more superior to the West, being the EU and the
US. Western countries also are executing a split between democracy and capitalism, nonetheless one that is less scandalously ostensible. Their means of state controlled economy, whose policies
do not require and moreover prevent the possibility of democratic
expression of endorsement or refusal on the part of the citizens,
consists in the measures of “austerity cuts,” “market oriented education,” rising gender and social inequality, and the sacrifice of
the basic human freedoms in the name of “security” in an era of
“war against terrorism” that has lasted for more than a decade. To
believe in the story of the weak state as a victim of the “elemental
forces” of capitalism implies a prior belief in the narrative of the naturalness of the economic laws (of capitalism).
In order to lay the foundations of a different economy, one that
is not based on wage labor and the exploitation of human life and
nature, but rather on action in accordance with their resources, we
must rethink the concept of the state in a radical way, one structurally different from the modern bourgeois state. If the structure
originating in the bourgeois state is preserved, it will mean that
the determination in the last instance is still the same. In order
to arrive to a determination in the last instance of a non-exploitative, non-wage-labor-based social order where the determination
is affected by the real, we must first arrive to the generic core of
the notion of the state, and more specifically of the modern state.
As soon as we determine the generic term of “the state,” we can
radicalize it by letting it be determined by the effects of the real.
The generic notion, isolated from the chôra of the transcenden-

78 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

tal material that is offered by modern philosophies originating in
the Enlightenment, should be used as the minimal transcendental
description for the determining effect (or “symptom”) of the real.
III.2. Auto-acceleration of Capitalism as Speculation
and its Political Infrastructure
According to Marx in Volume 3 of Capital, the inherent laws of
the capitalist political and economic order will nourish and exacerbate the contradiction between pure speculation as the primary
mode of operation of capitalism and the instance of the material
it aims to control and exploit. Speculation out of joint will assume
a life of its own, detached from the material possession of capital
as private property or as simply having actual money. Speculative
capital, the capital with which the finance industry operates today,
is potential money, pure speculation. Its potentiality derives from
investments of mere estimations of the worth of third persons’
material property and assets. It is the association of investors and
clients, creditors and debtors, the networks they create, and the
financial fluxes that such networks navigate, that create financial
growth and its economic (side) effects. Marx writes:
The capital, which in itself rests on a social mode of production and presupposes a social concentration of means
of production and labour-power, is here [stock exchange
market] directly endowed with the form of social capital
(capital of directly associated individuals) as distinct from
private capital, and its undertakings assume the form of
social undertakings asdistinct from private undertakings.
It is the abolition of capital as private property within the
framework of capitalist production itself.28
Contemporary finance capital, or the so called finance industry, relies and profits from the operations of circulation as a process per se and as tautology, divorced from any grounding in the
material basis of capital.
I have explained the process in more detail in the previous
pages of this book, not only in theoretical terms, but also in terms
of evidence related to the post 2008 crisis in the US and henceforth globally. I also presented data, derived from the US Government commissioned report on the crisis, pointing out the absurd
fact that the greatest giants of the finance industry had been op28
Karl Marx, “Interest and Profit of Enterprise,” in Karl Marx, Capital: A
Critique of Political Economy, Vol. 3: The Process of Capitalist Production,
ed. Frederick Engels (New York: International Publishers, 1894), available
at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1894-c3/ch23.htm.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 79

erating with virtually no capital investment of their own. Their
“capital” had been the “information,” “knowledge,” and political
support and legitimation—an engagement of speculation that the
US government report on the crisis termed more than once as
swindling.29 According to Marx, such a development is necessary
and inevitable as the last stage of capitalism:
This is the abolition of the capitalist mode of production within
the capitalist mode of production itself, and hence a self-dissolving contradiction, which prima facie represents a mere phase
of transition to a new form of production. It manifests itself
as such a contradiction in its effects. It establishes a monopoly
in certain spheres and thereby requires state interference. It
reproduces a new financial aristocracy, a new variety of parasites in the shape of promoters, speculators and simply nominal
directors; a whole system of swindling and cheating by means of
corporation promotion, stock issuance, and stock speculation.
It is private production without the control of private property.30
This stage is metastatic for capitalism, ensuing into the greatest imaginable contradiction that will lead to self-dissolution, says
Marx.
Post-2008 finance capitalism is one of perpetual crisis, whereas, as Jacques Rancière says, crisis cannot be a permanent pathological state as, by definition, it is not permanent. Instead, it is the
“robust health system” of exploitation presented as illness to the
“ignorant ones” or to the exploited (those who can be convinced
that they are “ill” rather than exploited).31 What our contemporary media and corporate political powers call “crisis” seems to be,
by all of its constitutive characteristics, the final stage of capitalism which Marx describes as “self-dissolving.” It unveils the reality
of economic production and social and technological progress as
one unfolding virtually independently from the “material basis”
(monetarily re-presented materiality) of private capital.
The acceleration process, which is bound to happen through
what Marx called “the credit system,” the ever growing distance
between actual paying and buying of a commodity, and the possibility of an ever expanding “intermission” of the credit period,
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC), The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the
Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States (Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Publishing Office, 2011), available at http://www.gpo.gov/
fdsys/pkg/GPO-FCIC/content-detail.html
30
Marx, “Interest and Profit of Enterprise,” in Marx, Capital, Vol. 3.
31
Jacques Rancière, “Time, Narration and Politics,” Identities: Journal for
Politics, Gender and Culture: Identities 11.1 (2014): 13.

29

80 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

divulges the spectrality of capital, money, and private property. Acceleration through the “credit system” as the final stage of
capitalism is announced and elaborated by Marx in Volume III,
Chapter 5 of Capital. As the US Government Report on the 2008
financial crisis shows, Wall Street CEO’s do not have to invest
any real or actual private property, and practically no capital of
theirs has to be invested in order to initiate, manage, and profit
from an investment project. Quite the contrary, it is the private
property of the poor that had been invested and then defaulted as
the post 2007 crisis occurred. By no material investment of one’s
own investment, “industrialists” create an unstoppable growing
capital that enables them and government to control society as
the highest form of politico-economic power. The illusion of capital’s materiality and material property, serving as the basis for an
economy, has become apparent through the financial speculation
whose final form becomes sheer swindling. Albeit aiming at pure
profit and exploitation of the poor only, the crisis has also and
unwittingly shown that the “emperor had been naked” for quite
some time—that capital as the material and real basis of economic
processes is a mirage. On the basis of this particular contradiction,
the “stock exchange managers” have managed to amass most of
the material resources for themselves.
Acceleration is immanent to capitalism. Capitalism is unstoppably accelerated by the inherent laws of speculation itself, and
therefore that of de-materialization.
On one hand, the acceleration is technical; for example,
with the same magnitude and number of actual turnovers
of commodities for consumption, a smaller quantity of
money or money tokens performs the same service. This
is bound up with the technique of banking. On the other
hand, credit accelerates the velocity of the metamorphoses
of commodities, and thereby the velocity of money circulation. [...] Acceleration by means of credit, of the individual
phases of circulation or the metamorphosis of commodities, and later the metamorphosis of capital, and with it an
acceleration of the process of reproduction in general. (On
the other hand, credit helps to keep the acts of buying and
selling apart longer, and serves thereby as a basis for speculation.) Contraction of reserve funds may be viewed in two
ways: as a reduction of the circulating medium on the one
hand, and on the other, as a reduction of that part of capital
which must always exist in the form of money.32
Karl Marx, “The Role of Credit in Capitalist Production,” in Marx,
Capital, Vol. 3, available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1894-c3/ch23.htm.

32

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 81

One does not need the enactment of a “process of acceleration”
of capitalism as a form of resistance aimed at its demise, as the
“Accelerationist Manifesto” argues, 33 simply because it is a process generated by capitalism itself. Acceleration does not only take
place in the form of finance capital, but also in the area of material production, i.e. in technological-militaristic development. The
unstoppable development of the means of production, which is
also the means of exploitation of the human species, is constantly
accelerated. This is technological development. Technological development is subject to private property, capital invested in it, and
the material conditions for it; its inventions are in the possession
of capitalist oligarchs exclusively. The imagined political revolution via technological acceleration requires a reversed model of
ownership and reinvention of the social role of technological development. In order to achieve these communist goals, following
the model of associations of producers advocated by Marx, the
technological processes, which are physically (really or “materially”) grounded in the individuals who innovate, should be appropriated by the actual producers. As a consequence, this will lead to
a replacement of the spectrality and superfluity of capital (money)
by real and tangible social re-production.
However, politics in the strict sense is far more complex than
economics. It enacts the totality of the relations in a society. That is
why the political horizon cannot be reduced to a shift in economic
production and ownership. It needs to be invented in accordance
with the principle of radical sociality of production as the central
economic fundament, as well as with the political (and metaphysical) goal of transcending the dualism of “the belly and the abstract
activity” (Marx).
In capitalism, the product of a social process, i.e. of an “association of producers” of commodities, consists of use value and
surplus value, or in the case of the finance industry, of surplus
value only. It is claimed as property by a handful of people coordinating the social process, including both the political and the
economic reality. In other words, capitalism, in particular in its
neoliberal form, is not so much about the material possession of
what is potentially capital, but about the capacity and entitlement
to assign monetary value, and hence, the status of capital (and for
that matter, of commodity as well). This is political capacity and
entitlement.
In what Marx announces as the late stage of capitalism, i.e. in
finance capitalism, the process of signification—of turning a maAlex Williams and Nick Srnicek, “#Accelerate: Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics,” Critical Legal Thinking (weblog), May 14, 2013, http://
criticallegalthinking.com/2013/05/14/accelerate-manifesto-for-an-accelerationist-politics/.

33

82 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

terial, physical good into market value or commodity—is mainly
carried out through mere “swindling,” as mentioned in the US report on the post 2008 financial crisis. In this process, the “private
ownership of property” has been proven to be “just ownership”
as Marx predicted—a mere instance of the material to be exploited by the “stock exchange managers” (Marx). As the essentially
speculative nature of the capitalist economy has accelerated, the
central contradiction has moved to an extreme. According to
Marx, the contradiction taken in extremis must be resolved by
self-dissolving the impossible, unsustainable, contradicting couple. If the unsustainable and bubbled up speculative aspect of the
contradiction culminates, if it exacerbates the fissure with the real
and the physical that it has introduced in principio, it will founder
as the real starts to “act on its own,” escaping the control of philosophy (= ideology of capitalism). Unruly as it is, thanks to its brutal, physical force, or/and the force of the real, which can include
material actions carried out by inanimate agencies, it will disperse
the ruling webs of meaning, or the existing universe and estimation of values. Such a process would lead to the self-dissolution of
the founding binary of capitalism, because the reality is constituted
by, grounded in, and conditioned by social process, rather than capital investment (in the form of actual monetary assets). Materiality
of contemporary reality lies in society, in its physicality and effects
of a conditioning real, rather than in the symbolism of money.
III.3. Reversing the Self-dissolving Binary
Following Marx’s prescriptions, if and when the above takes place,
we will be called upon to build a vision of materiality, sociality,
and socialism on the material or real basis of the determination
in the last instance of the existing and most profitable economic models. This ought to be done by recourse to their materialist
re-volution, i.e. by way of arriving at the material/physical determination in the last instance of social representation. The goal of
such procedure would be to ground the economic models subject
to revolutionary reversal in the material qua real, and condition
them by it, i.e. by their material determination in the last instance.
This result of the ultimate development of capitalist production
is a necessary transitional phase towards the reconversion of capital into the property of producers, although no longer as private
property of the individual producers, but rather as the property
of associated producers or outright social property. On the other
hand, the stock company is a transition towards the conversion
of all functions of in the reproduction process that still remain
linked with capitalist property into mere functions of associated

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 83

producers, or into social functions.34
Divested from any real, material, or physical base, divested
from a base that maintains its connection with the material via the
proxy of investment capital, the model of production dominated
by the finance industry unravels the economy’s fundamental sociality. Let us remind ourselves of the US Government’s report on
the post 2008 financial crisis, which notes and documents that the
crisis was provoked by the fact that investment giants were operating with virtually no capital of their own. Investment mortgage
backed funds or bank crediting were de facto made possible by
clients’ investments, i.e. assets that were at risk to be defaulted. In
line with Marx’s vision of the last, most developed, and metastatic
stage of capitalism, we will call the latter “mere capital owners”
(Marx), whereas the true capitalists are those who “manage” the
funds without investing any of their material property. He writes:
Transformation of the actually functioning capitalist into
a mere manager or, administrator of other people’s capital, and of the owner of capital into a mere owner, a mere
money, is capitalist [sic]. Even if the dividends that which
they receive include the interest and the profit of enterprise, i.e., the total profit (for the salary of the manager is,
or should be, simply the wage of a specific type of skilled
labour, whose price is regulated in the labour-market like
that of any other labour), this total profit is henceforth received only in the form of interest, i.e., as mere compensation for owning capital that now is entirely divorced from
the function in the actual process of reproduction, just as
this function in the person of the manager is divorced from
ownership of capital. Profit thus appears (no longer only
that portion of it, the interest, which derives its justification
from the profit of the borrower) as a mere appropriation of
the surplus-labour of others, arising from the conversion
of means of production into capital, i.e., from their alienation vis-à-vis the actual producer, from their antithesis as
another’s property to every individual actually at work in
production, from manager down to the last day-labourer.
In stock companies the function is divorced from capital
ownership, hence also labour is entirely divorced from
ownership of means of production and surplus-labour.35
The Report of the Inquiry Committee on the 2008 financial
crisis confirms this projection to be true, and provides ample evidence for it:
34
35

Marx, “Interest and Profit of Enterprise,” in Marx, Capital, Vol. 3.
Marx, “Interest and Profit of Enterprise,” in Marx, Capital, Vol. 3.

84 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

In the years leading up to the crisis, too many financial institutions, as well as too many households, borrowed to the
hilt, leaving them vulnerable to financial distress or ruin if
the value of their investments declined even modestly. For
example, as of 2007, the five major investment banks—Bear
Stearns, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch,
and Morgan Stanley—were operating with extraordinarily
thin capital. By one measure, their leverage ratios were as
high as 40 to 1, meaning for every $40 in assets, there was
only $1 in capital to cover losses.36
Those who capitalize on an investment and those who extract
immense profit do not in fact own the material basis for it. What
they own is a legally designated status to operate and profit from
someone else’s private property. Once this becomes obvious, what
remains to be done is that someone finally shouts, “the emperor
is naked,” or at least starts behaving like it. What gives life to the
finance industry is the will of “the mere owners of capital” (the
exploited ones) to enter into associations that create profit. These
processes are fundamentally social. Only a purely social process
can enable the usurpation of the real by speculation. In order to
overcome the alienation created by such usurpation, which foregrounds exploitation of the bodies of human and non-human animals, one ought to seek the purely material—as the real, physical
or practical, and “material,” in Marx’s sense—grounding of the
social.
III.4. The Material or Non-speculative Grounding of
the Social
Sociality is a linguistic and communicative reality, its means are of
language. It is fundamentally subjectivity. Its radical subjectivity
is that which admits the jarring difference between the Laruellian
“Stranger,” the inevitable gesture of the auto-alienation of the real
as the fundament of subjectivity formation, and the real. The radical subjectivity is defined by its anteriority to any philosophical
ambition to reconcile the two instances by way of usurping the
real, a gesture executed by virtue of establishing an amphibology
between the real and the “meaning” (language, subjectivity, truth).
Philosophy, regardless of its inner plurality, can be seen as a
monolithic phenomenon in the following sense—it inevitably establishes an equation between the real and thought. Even when it
declares an insurmountable split between the two, even when it declares the real to be inaccessible, as in the case of the post-Kantian
36

FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, xix.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 85

critical legacy, it still thinks in terms of the equation. Namely, by
relegating the real into the realm of the unthinkable, the inaccessible to thought, it commits a “fuite en avance (preemptive escape)
into fiction,” resulting into instituting language (thought/”fiction”/
the Stranger) as the only form of reality that thought should be
interested in and aspire to understand.37 Thereby, the philosophical affirmation of the irreconcilable split between the real and
thought, and of the real’s radical indifference to thought’s aspirations, remains within the perennial philosophical equation rendering the real reducible to “truth,” i.e. to thought. This result is
brought about precisely by the reversal of the equation. Namely,
through the gesture of declaring the real non-existent, being that
it is non-existent for and to us, the philosophical thought of the
post-Kantian turn assigns to language the status of the real and
perpetuates the same amphibology.38
Consequently, in order to determine the material grounding of
sociality in the last instance, i.e. in order to establish its determination in the last instance as determination in terms of the real, one
ought to avoid philosophical circularity of thought. With the aim
of achieving this goal, we shall apply the non-philosophical method of arriving to a concept that is radically descriptive, i.e. minimally transcendental in its identification of the affect of the real
that determines it in the last instance.39 Such posture of thought is
fundamentally scientific, says Laruelle. Scientific thought is primitive and naive insofar as it aims to be descriptively exhaustive but
does not institute a “truth” of the real, nor does it deal with its
“essence.”40 Describing exteriority, its locations, its operations, its
effects (on the environment, including the humans), and arriving
to an elaborate description is what scientific thought aspires to do.
Philosophy will always look for and posit science too late—
at the end of its ‘reflection,’ at the end of its ‘project’ of objectivity, at the end of its ‘dialectic’, and in general at the
end of the transcendence that founds all of its techniques.
Now, it is precisely transcendence that science excludes, at
least from the relation (of non-relation) that it ‘maintains’
in the last instance with the real. Hence, its naivety, its unreflectiveness, its realism, its ‘blindness,’ which is so insupportable to philosophical ob-jectification that the latter
Laruelle, Philosophie et non-philosophie, 231.
Katerina Kolozova, The Cut of the Real: Subjectivity in Poststructuralist
Philosophy (New York: Columbia University Press, 2014), 1.
39
Laruelle, Introduction au non-marxisme, 47.
40
François Laruelle, From Decision to Heresy: Experiments in Non-Standard Thought (Falmouth, UK/New York: Urbanomic/Sequence Press,
2012), 98.
37

38

86 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

never stops denigrating them, reducing them, or falsifying
them—this is what goes by the name of ‘epistemology’, and
is the very epistemo-logos in every epistemology. 41
To define the “essence” of human existence in philosophical
terms is to commit violence against the physical (or the “material” in the Marxist or non-philosophical sense). To place it in the
realm of abstraction or “pure value” is to formulate it as a surplus
value. The philosophical determination in the last instance of the
human species is no different from the capitalist one. A materialist
determination of the human based on Marx’s conception of materialism without philosophy, i.e. “scientific” materialism, is one that
views the instance of the mental also materialistically. Therefore,
if the fundamental interest of the proletariat is social, the form of
sociality that the “communist horizon” postulates as its goal is one
that would be materially determined by a sense of wellbeing. It
will consist of what Marx calls “spiritual satisfaction,” combined
and in no contradiction with the bodily. Let us remind ourselves
one more time that Marx argues that the true goal of communism
is the transcendence of human alienation created by the body/
mind dichotomy.42 The “spiritual” necessarily materializes itself as
a bodily sensation:
That man’s physical and spiritual life is linked to nature
means simply that nature is linked to itself, for man is a
part of nature.43
The material that Marx is concerned with is that of the physical, of what can suffer or sense pleasure, or in other words, the material of the organic. In the last instance, praxis is also determined
by the physical. The communist emancipation is an emancipation
of the physical from the tyranny of the Spirit detached from and
opposed to the material or the real. It can be reduced to the hierarchically superior constituent of the archaic binary of the body
and mind, or matter and idea. It also entails emancipation of the
spiritual, which suffers from the alienation and the split between
the spiritual and physical production The spiritual suffers insofar as it is an abstract ruling the physical turned into an object,
treated as if it was an inanimate matter. It suffers from its own
Laruelle, From Decision to Heresy, 99-100.
Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in Marx,
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
43
Karl Marx, “First Manuscript: Estranged Labor,” in Marx, Economic and
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, available at http://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/labour.htm.
41

42

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 87

deprivation of physical sensation, of the death of the physical that
it contains in order to be an abstraction. Therefore, technological
progress and its acceleration, in communist terms, can be emancipating so long as they are emancipating the subjugated physical
and nature. A society of emancipated bodies and minds, a society
that has transcended the split and hierarchy between the two, can
create and sustain an economy based on the “free associations of
producers.” The communist concept of economy operates only by
virtue of suspending the hierarchy of the “higher good” (an abstraction) over the physical, including the “higher good” of communism and its economy of “free associations.” As long as they
produce the division of “the belly and the abstract activity,” they
are not communist.44
A communist producer is not alienated from his or her work
and its fruits. Therefore, in some sense, communism offers a sense
of possession or ownership for every member of society. In order for this “sense of possession” to be material, it has to be realized physically through the bodies of the members of the society.
Therefore, in order for communism to be communal it also has to
be very individualistic, as each body in a society must vouch for it.
The idea that the individual must suffer in the name of a common
good is absurd (from a materialist point of view, meaningless) and
one never argued for by Marx. If so, the common good would become a purpose in itself, a self-serving and auto-referential goal.
Hence, it would become an abstraction, detached from the physical experiences of the bodies of a society (not the “social body,” as
that is yet another abstraction).
In short, by the very logic of Marx’s argument, the opposition
between the individual and the common would be untenable.
Also, it is something Marx never argued for. His critique of the
private property is historical, and therefore concerns its bourgeois
and/or capitalist form. An argument in favor of sacrificing the individual wellbeing in the name of an abstract higher good is one
of martyrdom.
Martyrdom is a theological and philosophical value, not a
communist one. Communism is radically democratic. The Leninist and post-Leninist legacy of communism has instituted it as
a form of Abrahamic theology, of self-sacrifice and sacrifices, of
martyrdom and physical suffering in the name of a grand idea.
The theology of this tradition, i.e. the Judeo-Christian and Islamic
theology of self-sacrifice, is hateful of democracy in the sense that
Jacques Rancière writes of “the hatred of democracy.”45 It is hateful
of the idea that everyone is equally competent enough to partici44
Marx, “First Manuscript: Wages of Labor,” in Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.
45
Jacques Rancière, The Hatred of Democracy (London: Verso, 2006).

88 | THE METAPHYSICS OF CAPITALISM

pate in the building of a just society. It is also hateful of the bodily,
of individuality as linked to a mortal body, and its finality vis-à-vis
the immortality of the great idea. Such structure of a world (in
Larulle’s sense, a universe of language which is no less material or
real, i.e. a universe determined by the real) is fundamentally religious, and more specifically, Abrahamic. Contrary to this, Marx’s
idea of commonality is profoundly individualistic, as the idea of
equality is one materially established among the individuals in a
society, rather than a detached, self-sufficient, or ubiquitous abstraction. As far as property is concerned, commonality should
create a reality that is not only perceived, but also experienced—
not only as collective, but also as individual—by each and every
individual in a society.
The free associations of producers collectively hold possession
of the means of production that originate in the commons of all
products and forms of access to natural resources. The commons
should effectively be equally and directly accessible to every-body
in a society. The very logic of the structure of a community should
determine the accessibility of the commons, as well as the collective or desired contributions to their creation, instead of coerced
ones. It should be fundamentally democratic by way of enabling
everyone to contribute equally to its re-production, and also by
having unlimited access to the use of its products. The products
are not commodities, as the surplus value is out of the equation. It
is a radically different economic model. At the dusk of capitalism,
in the zone of the internet, communities appear that constitute
commonality and produce common goods simultaneously. Their
products are not final, they do not offer objects that can be manipulated, separated from the community, or commodified. Instead,
they enable a process of continuous production. The mechanisms
of control are set as internal rules of its productivity, determined
in the last instance by a radically democratic concept of knowledge, which is one affected by the immanence of knowledge. The
real of knowledge immanently affects the program of its production by allowing it to be constantly generated by the operations
of knowledge as real or a matter in its own right, rather than by
the philosophical agenda of a group of people who would programmatize the “development” of the community and its production. The mechanisms of control rely precisely on contradiction,
conflicting knowledge or views, which are resolved in a way that
is more a matter of craft than political power. Anonymity, in the
sense of suspension of “auctoritas,” is the mode of operation of
the creative online communities. The anonymity at issue is not an
effacement of the individual, but quite to the contrary, it results
from the multitude of individuals that participate in it. The functioning of such a community and its production is fundamentally
social, where the social is “superposed” (as in quantum theory)

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 89

with the individual.
The analogy of superposition taken from Laruelle’s non-standard philosophy (a term more often used in the latest stage of
non-philosophy), and inspired by quantum theory, serves to enable us to understand the fundamentally social nature of the individual and its reverse, not as a paradox but as two realities that can
be viewed unilaterally. The fact that they are viewed unilaterally
does not mean that one does not affect the other as its real foregrounding and its determination in the last instance. As questions
of temporality are not relevant for our discussion, we are neither
interested in the issues of “simultaneity” of both realities, nor in
the issues of “sequentiality.” It is of no relevance to us whether the
individual or the society comes first, neither in the temporal nor
in the axiological sense. What matters is that the social constitutes
a real in its own right, as does the human-in-human, and that one
conditions the other by immanently affecting it.
Only in community does each individual have the means of
cultivating his gifts in all directions; therefore, only in the community is personal freedom possible. In the previous substitutes for
the community (e.g., in the State), personal freedom has existed
only for the individuals who developed as part of the ruling class,
and only insofar as they were individuals of that class.46
The relations of the two realities ought to be regulated in a way
that enables the wellbeing of the bodies that constitute the society
as its communist determination in the last instance. Whether the
individual engenders society, or the other way around, is a fundamentally philosophical question, one of assigning values in the
axiological sense that boils down to theology. The question of the
eventual “superposition” of the two realities, in line with its conceptualization in quantum theory, would be a philosophical one.
Exploring this issue would be a self-indulging, purely speculative,
and auto-referential project, as it is of no direct relevance for the
social praxis that is subject to our study. It is inoperative with regard to the project of creating a society that enables equality and
wellbeing for every-body, and is therefore irrelevant for the subject
matter of this study. Methodological questions in sciences are determined by the subject matter (or “the material”) of research. The
subject matter in our case is “a transcendental material” that is in
its last instance linguistic, namely the political, and is determined
by a real that has its own intrinsic laws. The real is not an abstraction. It requires a language of universality. However, universality is
not the same as generality. The concept of superposition borrowed
Karl Marx, “Feuerbach: Opposition of the Materialist and Idealist Outlooks,” in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The German Ideology (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1968), available at https://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1845/german-ideology/ch01.htm.
46

5: Technology, the Body, and the
Materialist Determination in the Last
Instance of the Communist Society of
“Cyborgs”

I. Humanism in a Post-humanist Era and its Communist
Prospects
In its commitment, Marx’s humanism is not philosophical. The
anthropocentric human of philosophy or theology is transcendentally impoverished and reduced to a determination in the last instance that is fundamentally material—the human is determined
by the real of its “species being.” The real is sensuous and physical.
Therefore, the opposition of body and mind is inoperative in its
classical philosophical sense, as both instances are ultimately determined by the real, insofar as they are material or physical. The
human is barely more than an animal, insofar as its determining
real is a bundle of muscles and nerves extended in the faculty of
“consciousness” that is grounded in the material reality of (human)
society. Questions such as “the meaning of life” are meaningless in
Marx, as what is required is less suffering and more wellbeing for
the human species, for its societies, and for the individuals constituting societies. Similarly, Laruelle reduces the human-in-human
to its real, to its mere experience of the lived, while all philosophical constructs of “meaning of human existence” are suspended.
I read Donna Haraway’s concept of the “cyborg” as fundamentally the product of a non-philosophical procedure of dualysis
brought about by radicalizing the dyad constituted by technology and the organic, rendering its two constituents irreducible to
one another. None of the two elements subsumes the other. The
human in Donna Haraway’s theory of the cyborg is but a prod-

92 | TECHNOLOGY, THE BODY, AND CYBORGS

uct of the interaction between the organic and the technological.
Let us radically determine “the technological” as an operation of
society, whereas society in the last instance should be determined
as the praxis of language. Resorting to psychoanalytic terminology, I would argue that the tendency to expand the possibilities
of language—as scientific, and hence technological—is the drive
and desire of society in any form. Language is an automaton of
self-propagation, and seeks to consolidate and perfect the society. Therefore, the language of science, the purely formal one (including mathematics, computer programming, and other formal
languages) and the narrative one (constituting a particular type of
ideology or a metaphysical project), unstoppably generates knowledge that results into ever more perfect technological prostheses
of the human “species being.” Technological progress is propelled
by necessity that is constituted by its inherent laws. A socialist or
communist framing of technological processes as fundamentally social would consist in aiming at overcoming exploitation and
alienation of the physical (Marx) or the organic (Haraway). The
technological as speculative or transcendental in the last instance,
insofar as it is an operation of language, should foster a sense of
physical wellbeing in the human species.
Shulamith Firestone’s technological utopism advocates technological development as the means of emancipation of the female
body, as determined by nature to such extent that it subjugates the
woman as a social being. Her technological agenda seeks to liberate the female human body from its natural vulnerability. In her
vision, technology seeks to liberate the female body from pain and
politically emancipate her as emancipation of the woman and society as a whole. Firestone’s appropriation of Marx, or her posture
of thought operating with Marx’s textual material, postulates that
the determination in the last instance of all exploitation—including class—lies in the sexual exploitation of women.1 According to
Firestone, the exploitation at issue is fundamentally physical as it
is related to sexual reproduction and sexuality. Romance is a mere
“theology” or ideology that seeks to protect the sexed hierarchy of
bodily exploitation, writes Firestone.2 Firestone says that the exploitation of the body is what determines all forms of exploitation
and should be overcome through technology. Donna Haraway argues similarly. If we subscribe to this theory and advocate such
a political project, the main question we should address is how
can the processes of accelerated technological progress, which
in the beginning of the 21st century serves none other than the
capital/ists, be overtaken by feminists and the proletariat, by the
Shulamith Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution (New York: William Morrow, 1970), 4–5.
2
Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex, 131.

1

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 93

subjugated bodies? The other and perhaps the more fundamental
question is “What is the purpose of technological progress today,”
or differently put, “To whom does it serve nowadays, in the globalized capitalist society of the second decade of the 21st century?”
II. The Capitalist Automaton of Technological Automation
Nowadays, capital possesses and controls technological progress.
Capital dictates its tempo, following the pace of unstoppable acceleration of capital’s reproduction (and “growth”). This reality is
grounded in the material facts of the ruling economic foundations
of technological development, its status of property (owned by the
capitalists), and finally in the fact that it is determined by the laws
of capitalist social reproduction. Not only are they capitalist, but
also they are masculinist, patriarchal, and militarist. The human
and its technological prostheses, or the hybrid of technology and
the organic that substitutes the human, or in other words Haraway’s “cyborg,” is the product of the militarist and misogynist
capitalism.
Cyborgs are not reverent; they do not re-member the cosmos. They are wary of holism, but needy for connectionthey seem to have a natural feel for united front politics,
but without the vanguard party. The main trouble with cyborgs, of course, is that they are the illegitimate offspring of
militarism and patriarchal capitalism, not to mention state
socialism. But illegitimate offspring are often exceedingly
unfaithful to their origins. Their fathers, after all, are inessential.3
The question of a socialist revolution in technological development is directly related to the question of the possible turn of
the illegitimate children’s avowal of their “father’s inessentiality,”
the non-existence of “cosmos,” their “wariness of holism” and
their “unfaithfulness to their origins.” Such a turn would itself be
a revolution. A revolutionary movement of this sort would be the
grounding gesture what would enable a) an initiation of the political project of expropriation of the processes of technological
development as property of a few (the capitalist and the exploiting
class), and b) establish social, collective sovereignty in ownership
of what is a creation of society and its workers. Technological development would have existed regardless of its finance-based acceleration and commodification for the purposes of “economic
Donna Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto,” in Donna Haraway, Simians,
Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New York: Routledge,
1991), 151.

3

94 | TECHNOLOGY, THE BODY, AND CYBORGS

growth” in a capitalist society. Technological development is the
material product of society as materiality (or physicality) or the
“being species.” Capitalism reduces it to property as a political
concept, which then dictates the economics of alienated labor and
of the out of joint, automated, self-regulated, and self-sufficient
value (the surplus value or profit).
A socialist turn would consist in a radically materialist reversal
of the processes of technological development, by way of grounding it in its fundamental sociality understood as commonality. It
would also consist in the dispelling of the specters of surplus value
by replacing it (the surplus value) with an always already technologically improved use value for all, distributed according to the
immanent laws of the society.
In this way, a society will be able to overcome the inner contradiction of capitalism, consisting in the split between the automated world of speculation, being the spectral universe of pure value (finance), and the material or physical world. The universe of
economic or financial value is but the product of a decision made
by those in power to arbitrate value and those who are endowed
with the sovereignty to institute such decisions. Consequently, in
the last instance the automated world of “self-regulated values” is
determined by a real that is outside the processes of automation,
by a decision that is contingent and physical. Capitalism “behaves”
as philosophy because it is the product of “decisionism” that then
establishes a self-sufficient universe of speculation pretending to
stipulate the real. Technological automation in capitalism mirrors
the very logic of capitalism—it is based on the presupposition that
it is a self-sufficient universe, and that the physical serves its auto-perfection, rather than the other way around.
But, once adopted into the production process of capital,
the means of labour passes through different metamorphoses, whose culmination is the machine, or rather, an automatic system of machinery (system of machinery: the automatic one is merely its most complete, most adequate
form, and alone transforms machinery into a system), set
in motion by an automaton, a moving power that moves
itself; this automaton consisting of numerous mechanical
and intellectual organs, so that the workers themselves are
cast merely as its conscious linkages. In the machine, and
even more in machinery as an automatic system, the use
value, i.e. the material quality of the means of labour, is
transformed into an existence adequate to fixed capital and
to capital as such; and the form in which it was adopted
into the production process of capital, the direct means of
labour, is superseded by a form posited by capital itself and
corresponding to it. In no way does the machine appear as

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 95

the individual worker’s means of labour.4
The worker, their suffering body and mind, is subjugated not
only by a part of humanity, i.e. the capitalist class, but also by the
lifeless process of automated value generation. The automated machine is not a means of production, it is an independent universe
parallel to the real of the physical and the lived, whereby no part of
the human participates in the former, and is in fact reduced without
a remainder to the latter (to a “conscious linkage” in an automated machine). The idea that the organic (Haraway), the physical
(Marx), or the lived (Laruelle) is mere material to the self-sufficient automation is fundamentally capitalistic. The realization of
such a political and fundamentally metaphysical project would be
the climax and the agony of capitalism itself. It would not liberate
women or the proletariat, as these categories will become obsolete.
In our post-humanist era, wage laborers will be reduced to wage
labor, without a subjectivity to liberate or emancipate itself. In the
middle of the second decade of the 21st century, one wonders if
in ten or twenty years from now, labor will still be wage labor, or
just reduced to labor or organic material used in the universe of
cybernetic automation.
One also wonders if there will be—albeit technologically enhanced—bodies to enjoy the fruits of the automated economic
production. Would there be only an auto-referential universe of
“value production,” without a sensuous substratum to absorb the
joy and pain issuing from the processes of production? The latter
of the two options is the more plausible one unless one admits that
the body, the “sensuous and the physical” (Marx), the “organic”
(Haraway), or the “lived” (Laruelle) is what ought to be liberated
through technological progress.
Marx’s text points out consistently that what the body needs to
be liberated from is precisely its subjugation by speculation, capitalist automation, and the “universe of values” detached from and
exploitative toward the physical. In our era of accelerated capitalism, the socialist goal par excellence is precisely the reversal of the
current hierarchy between technology and the organic. Automation is self-sufficient in a fashion that is analogous to the principle
of philosophy’s sufficiency as diagnosed by Laruelle. Its self-sufficiency implies objectivation of labor (i.e., its abstraction). Both
objectivation and abstraction are enabled by the split between
speculative reason (of philosophy and capitalism) and “living labor.” The function of objectivation, as a fundamentally capitalist
operation, is precisely the subjugation of the living labor and its
exploitation:
4
Karl Marx, Grundrisse: Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy,
trans. Martin Nicolaus (London: Penguin, 1973), 620.

96 | TECHNOLOGY, THE BODY, AND CYBORGS

The appropriation of living labour by objectified labour—of
the power or activity which creates value by value existing
for-itself—which lies in the concept of capital, is posited,
in production resting on machinery, as the character of the
production process itself, including its material elements
and its material motion. The production process has ceased
to be a labour process in the sense of a process dominated
by labour as its governing unity. Labour appears, rather,
merely as a conscious organ, scattered among the individual living workers at numerous points of the mechanical
system; subsumed under the total process of the machinery
itself, as itself only a link of the system, whose unity exists
not in the living workers, but rather in the living (active)
machinery, which confronts his individual, insignificant
doings as a mighty organism.5
The communist or socialist—or the properly Marxian—vision
of technological development aims to serve as an emancipating
extension of the “living labor” that is made possible by social
production. In his impressive rereading of Marx, Michel Henry
notes that this concern is the line of consistency and the underlying unifying principle of his entire opus, which is falsely split into
“young” and “late Marx.” The split between the “late and young
Marx,” argues Henry, is a falsity and the result of the creation of
“Marxism” before the publication of most of Marx’s philosophical
writings—in particular of The German Ideology, which is vindicated in a letter of the “mature Marx” as the work that aimed “to settle
accounts with our former philosophical conscience.”6 Emancipation of praxis as subjectivized life is the main political and philosophical concern of Marx, both in his philosophical and economic
writings and in his early and late work:
[...] the concepts that remain or that appear in the course
of the theoretical elaboration are those that have a fundamental reference to praxis, as, for example, the concepts of
the individual, of subjectivity, of life, or reality, and so on.7
Shulamith Firestone claims that if the subjugation of living labor is fundamentally physical, then in its last instance it is sexed.
Susceptibility to exploitation is related to the body’s vulnerability,
which is dependent upon the variables of age, health, among others, with gender or sex being the most massive variable among
Marx, Grundrisse: Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy, 621.
An excerpt from Marx’s letter, quoted in Michel Henry, Marx: A Philosophy of Human Reality (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983), 10.
7
Henry, Marx: A Philosophy of Human Reality, 12.
5

6

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 97

them all. However, gendered hierarchy in the exploitation of living labor in the processes of overall social reproduction is not a
variable, but rather a constant. This means that the emancipation
and liberation of the proletariat is dependent upon the success of
a feminist revolution. Technology in service of socialism is at the
same time technology in service of feminism.
III. The Status of Haraway’s Cyborg and Firestone’s
Technological Utopia in the Second Decade of the
21st Century
Today, the technological prosthesis of humanity enables the complete remodeling of kinship and the reinvention of gender and sex.
The question of the direction in which such processes may go is a
matter of political decision. The seemingly autonomous processes
of scientific development are in the last instance affected by the
real of a political decision. The fact that the political decision is
a discursive occurrence does not make its effects less real. The
automaton of “machinic reality” is always already affected by the
tuche that can result from linguistic activity. However, the linguistic activity at issue is in the last instance determined by the physical, by the real of muscles and nerves that desires, i.e. that needs,
enjoys, and/or suffers.
The political is in the last instance physical, and it is that thing
against which automation can be defined as its opposite: automation is a reality defined by the absolute absence of political will. The
political is automation’s exteriority and intervenes into signifying
automatism on the principle of tuché (chance, coincidence, incidence, incident or the thrust of the real). The political decision
reshapes reality by enacting violence that consists in the mere imposition of will, of a particular desire for a change in the processes
of signification instituted by virtue of someone’s “because I said
so.” Although the “because I said so” is an enunciation, although
it is emptied of transcendental content, it virtually is a bodily extension of the physical instance of wanting, the instance of pure
physical desiring that is easily translatable into physical violence if
the discursive means do not work.
In our era of neuroscience, it seems naive to insist on the classical philosophical opposition between the physical and the mental. Although neuroscience has not yet offered an explanation of
how it is possible that mental processes establish a certain autonomy with respect to the physical, it has nonetheless proven that
in the last instance the mental is rooted in the physical. Morality
is fundamentally social, and sociality is fundamentally a physical
necessity of the human species (and other mammals too), as we
can learn from Patricia Churchland’s Braintrust: What Neurosci-

98 | TECHNOLOGY, THE BODY, AND CYBORGS

ence Tells Us About Morality.8 The political “I want to” and “make it
happen because I said so,” can dispense of language if one chooses
so—they are in the last instance physical because the processes
that they generate can suspend all verbal or linguistic justification. Just as morality is a physical necessity linked to the social
as yet another product of physical necessity, so too is the political. Politics is nothing else than a more complex organization of
a society, according to the ruling morals and power positions for
the purposes of regulating its reproduction and homeostasis. In
this era of blooming neuroscience, one can safely argue that the
continuity between the physical and the mental is scientifically
demonstrated. So is the possibility of signifying automation (technology in the digital era) and its independence from the organic.
However, does the possibility of automated signification imply superiority of “thought” (the synthetic, non-physical, and “scientifically” created universe) over body? After all, isn’t categorization
of superior/inferior valuing, and aren’t automatons indifferent to
values? Therefore, from whose position and from whose point of
view is one making the statement about the superiority of the automated systems of computation over the “merely organic” or the
“imperfect physical”? From the viewpoint of the machine? Why?
Machines are more efficient in production and processes of information than animals (including the human animals), but what
are the purposes of that? Is it knowledge as a value per se, as a
self-standing meaning, or causa finalis? Perfecting of nature? Either of the two options are in fact what Marx would call a fetish,
as either of each is a self-standing, auto-referential, and a self-sufficient abstraction. Unless put in service to the “physical or sensuous” self of the “human species,” technology as a purpose in itself
is theology.
The machine or automation as an independent, self-enveloped
and self-sufficient universe is capitalism out of joint:
The development of the means of labour into machinery
is not an accidental moment of capital, but is rather the
historical reshaping of the traditional, inherited means of
labour into a form adequate to capital. The accumulation of
knowledge and of skill, of the general productive forces of
the social brain, is thus absorbed into capital, as opposed to
labour, and hence appears as an attribute of capital.9
Machinic automation out of joint is endless chatter or endless
noise in a schizophrenic split from the material in the last instance,
8
Patricia Churchland, Braintrust: What Neuroscience Tells Us About Morality (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011).
9
Marx, Grundrisse: Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy, 622.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 99

i.e. the material which is always already there, indifferent to any attempts of the signifying intentionality to reproduce and “perfect’ it.
Following Firestone and Haraway’s call for feminist and socialist revolution through technology, let us not forget that one should
also emancipate the body from the brutal exploitation on the side
of (Hegel’s) Spirit. Moreover, one should overcome the contradiction immanent to capitalism consisting in what Marx diagnoses as
the split between “abstract activity and a belly.” The brutal indifference of “abstraction” vis-à-vis the “belly” creates an unsustainable
split that will inevitably result in the real of revolt of the suffering
bodies. Regardless of the outcomes of such (imagined) revolt, the
very logic of capitalism will not only be undermined, but also cancelled; it will consist in what we called in chapter 4 the specific
cruelty of capitalism—the full rationalization of any suffering of
the body producing “self-exploiting subjects.”
Sexuality and reproduction are central coordinates of bodily
experiences. That is why I do not see the possibility of feminist
emancipation in the capacity of technology to amputate sexuality and reproduction from the female body. A properly Marxian
vision of technology’s feminist emancipating force would consist in the prosthetic function of liberating the female body from
pain, from the physical suffering specific to the female sex, and
increasing the potentiality of its active participation in social reproduction (including politics). At this point of technological and
cybernetic development, Firestone’s warning that technology does
not possess immanent emancipatory tendencies, but can rather be
used against women and children, has been proven right:
Though the sex class system may have originated in fundamental biological conditions, this does not guarantee
once the biological basis of their oppression has been swept
away that women and children will be freed. On the contrary, the new technology, especially fertility control, may
be used against them to reinforce the entrenched system of
exploitation.10
What technology does, and how it does it, affects the entire
society and makes it subject to political debate and the field of
political struggle. The idea that science and technology possesses
some inherent law of functioning and self-regulation resembles
the (neo)liberal idea that the capitalist economy is based on laws
that constitute a nature in its own right (or as if it emulates nature
perfectly). It is for this reason that it should be able to convey its
political/ideological/metaphysical presuppositions and its social
10

Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex, 10.

100 | TECHNOLOGY, THE BODY, AND CYBORGS

consequences in the so-called “commonsensical language.” According to Marx, one of the greatest political dangers of the automation of labor is that science would rule the lives and the possibilities of political utterances of the “living labor force”:
The science which compels the inanimate limbs of the machinery, by their construction, to act purposefully, as an
automaton, does not exist in the worker’s consciousness,
but rather acts upon him through the machine as an alien
power, as the power of the machine itself.11
In other words, science, which “does not exist in the worker’s
consciousness,” operates as an imposition upon and coerces the
bodies and minds of wage laborers—it introduces changes in the
society of which only those who control the capital can decide in
communication with those who speak the esoteric language of
their social cast, i.e. the scientists and the academia. A socialist
application of technology for the goal of emancipation and liberation of all and everyone in a society presupposes democratic discussion and choices of common interest. Consequently, a socialist
practice of technological development is grounded in a political
language everyone is “equally intelligent” (Rancière)12 to take part
in (of course, I speak of political grounding, whereas the formal
language of science operates according to its own intrinsic rules).
IV. Automation, Capitalist Speculation and (Standard)
Philosophy are the Object in the Last Instance of Communist Rebellion, Faithful to Marx’s Vision
The three are different instances of the same process that are at the
heart of capitalism and determine its inherent laws—the problems
of “abstraction.” Certainly, Marx is not problematizing a cognitive
faculty that is indispensible in the processes of producing knowledge of the surrounding reality. “Abstraction” is a decision about
reality that is endowed with a tendency to substitute the “unruly
real” (one which “makes no sense” in an accomplished universe of
meaning) with a meaning and act as the real that is more perfect
than the real itself. In this sense, it operates exactly as philosophy’s decisionism, creating an amphibology of the real and “truth”
(thought’s attempt to possess the real by way of engulfing it). Just
as non-standard philosophy operates with the transcendental material of philosophy by succumbing to the dictate of the real, so
does Marx invite us to work with ideas that will be in the last inMarx, Grundrisse: Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy, 621.
Jacques Rancière, The Ignorant Schoolmaster: Five Lessons in Intellectual
Emancipation (Stanford University Press, 1991), 101.
11

12

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 101

stance determined by the praxis. The real, physical, or sensuous
are the determination in the last instance of praxis as opposed to
the idealist pretentiousness that rapes the physical (and believes
“the physical loves it” and convinces it that it does).
Departing from the sociality that issues directly from the physical, which is first practice and then concept, Marx envisions the
socialist system as the most beneficial for all members of a society. What incites productiveness and joy and diminishes pain
for each individual in a society is beneficial for the society itself.
Marx believes that the prerequisite for such development, and the
principle that ensures the desired outcome, is fulfilling the goal
that I have determined in the previous chapters as metaphysical
(although Marx does not and would not use such determination).
Let us remind ourselves, the goal of communism (or its fundament), according to Marx, is “reintegration or return of man to
himself, the transcendence of human self-estrangement.”13 In
“Communist confession of faith,” part of The Communist Manifesto, the principle of communism is formulated as follows: “The
happiness of the individual is inseparable from the happiness of
all, etc.” Happiness is a category that is neither abstraction nor
materiality. It is radically metaphysical insofar as it belongs to the
realm of the necessary mediation of the real, as discussed previously. The goal of communism is to emancipate metaphysics from
the rule of philosophy, to radicalize it by rendering it “affected by
immanence,” by way of producing a posture of thought that would
“unilaterally correlate with the real,” follow the “syntax of the real”
(Laruelle), and be dictated by the “material interests of the human
species” (Marx).
The process and also the goal of the communist project is “democracy.” The Communist Manifesto requires the following “confessions of faith”:
Question 16: How do you think the transition from the
present situation to community of Property is to be effected?
Answer: The first, fundamental condition for the introduction of community of property is the political liberation of
the proletariat through a democratic constitution.
Question 17: What will be your first measure once you have
established democracy?
13

Karl Marx, “Third Manuscript: Private Property and Communism,” in
Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, trans. Martin
Mulligan (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1959), available at http://www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/comm.htm.

102 | TECHNOLOGY, THE BODY, AND CYBORGS

Answer: Guaranteeing the subsistence of the proletariat.14
The democratization of technological production is a fundamentally social process. If technology is to play a role in the
process of the democratization of society, or society’s progress toward its general emancipation, democratization of the dialogue
on the social and political aspects of technology is necessary. Human emancipation from automation is one of the core concerns of
communism and Marxian socialism. Feminist emancipation is its
immanent and indispensible aspect.

14
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, “Manifesto of the Communist Party,” in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1 (Moscow:
Progress Publishers, 1969), available at https://www.marxists.org/archive/
marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/.

References

A. Printed Secondary Sources
Churchland, Patricia. Braintrust: What Neuroscience Tells Us about
Morality. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011.
Dean, Jodi. The Communist Horizon. London: Verso Books, 2012.
Firestone, Shulamith. The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist
Revolution. New York: William Morrow and Co., 1970.
Gros, Daniel and Cinzia Alcidi. “The Crisis and the Real Economy.”
Intereconomics 1 (2010): 7–20.
Haraway, Donna. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and
Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century.” In Simians,
Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature, 149–181. New
York: Routledge, 1991.
Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri, Multitudes: War and
Democracy in the Age of Empire. New York: Penguin Putnam,
2004.
Harvey, David. The Enigma of Capital and the Crisis of Capitalism.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
---. Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution.
London: Verso, 2013.
Henry, Michel. Marx: A Philosophy of Human Reality. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1983.

104 | REFERENCES

Kolozova, Katerina. The Cut of the Real: Subjectivity in
Poststructuralist Philosophy. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Land, Nick. Fanged Noumena: Collected Writings 1987-2007. Edited
by Ray Brassier and Robin McKay. Faltmouth: Urbanomic,
2011.
Lapavitsas, Costas. Profiting Without Producing: How Finance
Exploits Us All. London: Verso, 2013.
Laruelle, François. Philosophie et non-philosophie. Liège: Pierre
Mardaga, 1989.
---. Théorie des Etrangers: Science des hommes, démocratie et nonpsychanalyse. Paris: Éditions Kimé, 1995.
---. Introduction au non-marxisme. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris: 2000.
---. Ethique de l’Étranger. Paris: Éditions Kimé, 2000.
---. Future Christ: A Lesson in Heresy. Translated by Anthony Paul
Smith. London/New York: Continuum, 2010.
---. From Decision to Heresy: Experiments in Non-Standard
Thought. Translated by Miguel Abreu et al. Falmouth/NewYork:
Urbanomic/Sequence, 2012.
---. Théorie générale des victimes. Paris: Fayard, 2012.
Laruelle, François, and Anne-Françoise Schmid. “L’identité
sexuée.” Identities 2.3 (2003): 9–61.
Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. The Communist Manifesto.
Translated by Steve Corcoran and Frederick Engels. Progress
Publishers: Moscow, 1969.
---. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Translated
by S. W. Ryazanskaya. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1971.
---. Grundrisse: Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy.
Translated by Martin Nicolaus. New York: Penguin Books,
1973.

TOWARDS A RADICAL METAPHYSICS OF SOCIALISM | 105

Noys, Benjamin. “The War of Time: Occupation, Resistance,
Communization.” Identities X.1-2 (2013): 83–92.
Rancière, Jacques. “Time, Narration and Politics.” Journal for
Gender, Politics and Culture: Identities 11 (2015): 7–18.
---. The Hatred of Democracy. Translated by Steve Corcoran.
London: Verso, 2006.
---. The Ignorant Schoolmaster: Five Lessons in Intellectual
Emancipation. Translated by Kristin Ross. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1991.
Scott, Brett. The Heretic Guide to Global Finance: Hacking the
Future of Money. London: Pluto Press, 2013.
Smith, Anthony Paul. A Non-Philosophical Theory of Nature:
Ecologies of Thought. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
B. Online Sources
Di Leo, Luca. “Soros Criticizes Obama’s Bailouts.” The Wall Street
Journal, March 1, 2010. Available at http://online.wsj.com/
news/articles/SB10001424052748704089904575093760994295
890.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission [FCIC]. The Financial Crisis
Inquiry Report: Final Report of the National Commission on
the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United
States. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office,
2011. Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/GPO-FCIC/
content-detail.html.
Marx, Karl. The Theses on Feuerbach. In Karl Marx and Frederick
Engels, The German Ideology. Translasted by Roy Pascal.
London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1938. Available at http://
www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/theses/.
---. Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844. Moscow:
Progress Publishers, 1959. Available at https://www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/EconomicPhilosophic-Manuscripts-1844.pdf.
---. Capital: Volume I. Translated by Samuel Moore and Edward
Aveling, edited by Frederick Engels. Moscow: Progress
Publishers, 1887. Available at https://www.marxists.org/

106 | REFERENCES

archive/marx/works/1867-c1/.
---. Capital: Volume II. Translated by I. Lasker. Moscow: Progress
Publishers, 1956. Available at https://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1885-c2/.
---. Capital Vol. III. Institute of Marxism and Leninism of USSR:
1959. Available at https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1894-c3/.
---. “On the Jewish Question.” In Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher
(February 1844). Available at http://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1844/jewish-question/.
---. The German Ideology. Translasted by Roy Pascal. Available at
https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/germanideology/.
Soros, George. “Angela Merkel’s Pyrrhic Victory.” Project Syndicate
VIII, October 7, 2013. Available at http://www.projectsyndicate.org/commentary/george-soroson-angela-merkel-spyrrhic-victory.
Spinoza, Benedict de. The Ethics. Translated by R. H. M. Elwes.
The Project Gutenberg Etext Publication, 2003. Available at
http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/3800.
Srnicek, Nick and Alex Williams. “#Accelerate Manifesto for an
Accelerationist Politics.” Critical Legal Thinking [weblog], May 14,
2012. Available at http://criticallegalthinking.com/2013/05/14/
accelerate-ma-nifesto-for-an-accelerationist-politics.

